## Adding New Brushes {#gimp-using-brushes}

Brushes

Add New

::: note
There is a quick method to add a new brush:
[???](#gimp-creating-brush-quickly).
:::

To add a new brush, after either creating or downloading it, you need to
save it in a format GIMP can use. The brush file needs to be placed in
the GIMP\'s brush search path, so that GIMP is able to index and display
it in the Brushes dialog. You can hit the Refresh button, which
reindexes the brush directory. GIMP uses three file formats for brushes:

GBR
:   GBR
    Formats
    GBR
    The `.gbr` (\"*g*imp *br*ush\") format is used for ordinary and
    color brushes. You can convert many other types of images, including
    many brushes used by other programs, into GIMP brushes by opening
    them in GIMP and saving them with file names ending in `.gbr`. This
    brings up a dialog box in which you can set the default Spacing for
    the brush.

    A technical specification of the GBR file format can be found on
    [developer.gimp.org](https://developer.gimp.org/core/standards/gbr/).

    ![Save a `.gbr` brush](images/using/file-gbr-export.png)

GIH
:   GIH
    Formats
    GIH
    The `.gih` (\"*g*imp *i*mage *h*ose\") format is used for animated
    brushes. These brushes are constructed from images containing
    multiple layers: each layer may contain multiple brush-shapes,
    arranged in a grid. When you save an image as a `.gih` file, a
    dialog comes up that allows you to describe the format of the brush.
    See [???](#gimp-using-animated-brushes) for more information about
    the dialog.

    A technical specification of the GIH file format can be found on
    [developer.gimp.org](https://developer.gimp.org/core/standards/gih/).

VBR
:   VBR
    Formats
    VBR
    The `.vbr` format is used for parametric brushes, i. e., brushes
    created using the Brush Editor. There is really no other meaningful
    way of obtaining files in this format.

MYB
:   MYB
    Formats
    MYB
    The `.myb` format is used for MyPaint brushes. Please refer to
    [???](#gimp-tool-mypaint-brush) for more information.

To make a brush available, place it in one of the folders in GIMP\'s
brush search path. By default, the brush search path includes two
folders, the system `brushes` folder, which you should not use or alter,
and the `brushes` folder inside your personal GIMP directory. You can
add new folders to the brush search path using the [Brush
Folders](#gimp-prefs-folders-data) page of the Preferences dialog. Any
GBR, GIH, or VBR file included in a folder in the brush search path will
show up in the Brushes dialog the next time you start GIMP, or as soon
as you press the Refresh button in the Brushes dialog.

::: note
When you create a new parametric brush using the Brush Editor, it is
automatically saved in your personal `brushes` folder.
:::

There are a number of web sites with downloadable collections of GIMP
brushes. Rather than supplying a list of links that will soon be out of
date, the best advice is to do a search with your favorite search engine
for "GIMP brushes". There are also many collections of brushes for other
programs with painting functionality. Some can be converted easily into
GIMP brushes, some require special conversion utilities, and some cannot
be converted at all. Most fancy procedural brush types fall into the
last category. If you need to know, look around on the web, and if you
don\'t find anything, look for an expert to ask.
