# Files {#gimp-using-fileformats}

Files

GIMP is capable of reading and writing a large variety of graphics file
formats. With the exception of GIMP\'s native XCF file format, file
handling is done by plug-ins. This makes it relatively easy to extend
GIMP to support new file types when the need arises.

## Save / Export Images {#save-export-image}

Save/Export Images

Export Images

::: note
When you open an image, let\'s say in JPG or PNG file format, it is
imported into GIMP\'s own XCF format, as a new project.

For example, a "sunflower.png" image will be loaded as "\*\[sunflower\]
(imported)-1.0 (indexed color, 1 layer)". The leading asterisk indicates
that this file has been changed. This image can be saved as
"sunflower.xcf" by using the `Save` command. If you need your image in
another format, you should use the `Export` command.
:::

When you are finished working with an image, you will save the results.
In fact, it is often a good idea to save at intermediate stages too.
GIMP is a pretty robust program, but on rare occasions crashes have
happened.

GIMP\'s native format XCF is special. It is the only format that can
store *everything* about an image (with the exception of "undo"
information). This is the reason that saving can only be done in this
format. It makes the XCF format especially suited for storing
intermediate results, and for saving images to be re-opened later in
GIMP.

XCF files are not readable by most other programs that display images.
Once you have finished editing your image, you can export it to the
format of your choice. GIMP supports a wide range of formats. Most file
formats that can be imported, can also be used for exporting.

## File Formats {#gimp-using-fileformats-export-dialog}

There are several commands for *saving* and *exporting* images. They are
listed in the section covering the [File Menu](#gimp-file-menu). More
information on how to use them can be found there.

GIMP allows you to *export* the images you create in a wide variety of
formats. It is important to realize that the only format capable of
saving *all* of the information in an image, including layers,
transparency, etc., is GIMP\'s native XCF format. Every other format
preserves some image properties and loses others. It is up to you to
understand the capabilities of the format you choose.

Exporting an image does not modify the image itself, so you do not lose
anything by exporting. See [Export file](#gimp-export-dialog).

::: note
When you close an image (possibly by quitting GIMP), you are warned if
the image has been changed without subsequently being saved (an asterisk
is in front of the image name in the title bar of the main window).
:::
