# []{#gimp-concepts-paths} Paths {#gimp-using-paths}

Paths

Using

Image

Paths

Paths are curves (known as Bézier-curves). To understand their concepts
and mechanism, look at the glossary
[Bézier-curve](#glossary-bezier-curve) or Wikipedia
[???](#bibliography-online-wkpd-bezier). The Paths tool allows you to
design complex shapes. When designing a shape, you first use the
[Paths](#gimp-tool-path) tool in GIMP to create a path. After that you
usually stroke or fill the path.

In GIMP, the term "Stroke path" means to apply a specific style to the
path (color, width, pattern, etc).

A path can be used in several ways:

-   You can convert a closed path to a selection.

-   Any path, open or closed, can be *stroked*; that is, painted on the
    image in a variety of ways.

-   A path can be *filled* with a color or pattern. If the path is not
    closed, it will try to figure out the shape and then fill it.
    However, this will not work if the path is a straight line.

<figure>
<img src="images/using/path-examples.png"
alt="Four examples of GIMP paths: one closed and polygonal; one open and polygonal; one closed and curved; one with a mixture of straight and curved segments." />
<figcaption>Illustration of four different paths</figcaption>
</figure>

## Path Creation {#gimp-using-paths-creating}

Start by drawing the outline for your path; the outline can be modified
later (see the [Paths](#gimp-tool-path) tool). To start, select the
Paths tool using one of the following methods:

-   Use [Tools \> Paths]{.menuchoice} from the menu.

-   Use the relevant icon ![](images/stock-icons/gimp-tool-path.svg) in
    toolbox.

-   Use the B keyboard shortcut.

When the Paths tool is selected, the mouse cursor changes into a
crosshair with a curve by default. The actual shape depends on your
[mouse pointer mode setting](#gimp-prefs-input-devices). Make sure that
the Paths Edit Mode in [Tool Options](#gimp-tool-path) is set to Design.

Left click in the image to create the first point of the path. Move the
mouse to a new point and left click to create another point linked to
the previous point. Although you can create as many points as you
desire, you only need two points to learn about Paths.

While adding points, the mouse cursor has a little "+" next to the
curve, which indicates that clicking will add a new point.

When the mouse cursor is close to one of the path points, the "+"
changes into a cross with arrows; like the move tool. You can then move
the existing path point.

To close your path, go with the mouse on top of the point you want to
connect to, and then Ctrl-click that point. When you are done designing
your path, you can press Enter. This will turn the path into a
Selection. You can also keep adding more points, or start changing the
curves of the path.

To edit the curves of your path, move the mouse cursor close to a line
segment, left-click and drag the line segment. Two events occur.

-   The line segment bends and curves as it is pulled.

-   Each line segment has two start points and end points marked by
    little square rectangles, these are called handles. A "direction
    line" now projects from each start point for the line segment that
    was moved. This direction line usually has a different color than
    the lines of the path.

The curved line segment leaves an end point in the same direction that
the "direction line" leaves the start point. The length of this line
controls how far the line segment projects along the "direction line"
before curving towards the other path point.

The handle at the end of each "direction line" can be dragged to change
the direction and length of the curve. The handles on the other end,
where they connect to the path, can be used to move the position of that
path point.

<figure>
<img src="images/using/path-with-anchors.png"
alt="Appearance of a path while it is manipulated using the Paths tool." />
<figcaption>Appearance of a path while it is manipulated</figcaption>
</figure>

The path is comprised of two components with both straight and curved
segments. Black squares are anchor points, the open circle indicates the
selected anchor, and the two open squares are the handles associated
with the selected anchor.

## Path Properties {#gimp-using-paths-properties}

Paths, like layers and channels, are components of an image. When an
image is saved in GIMP\'s native XCF file format, any paths it has are
saved with it. The list of paths in an image can be viewed and operated
on using the [Paths Dialog](#gimp-path-dialog). You can move a path from
one image to another by copying and pasting using the pop-up menu in the
Paths dialog, or by dragging an icon from the Paths dialog into the
destination image window.

GIMP paths belong to a mathematical type called "Bezier paths". What
this means in practical terms is that they are defined by *anchors* and
*handles*. "Anchors" are points the path goes through. "Handles" define
the direction of a path when it enters or leaves an anchor point: each
anchor point has two handles attached to it.

Paths can be very complex. If you create them by hand using the
[Paths](#gimp-tool-path) tool, they probably won\'t contain more than a
few dozen anchor points and usually a lot less than that. However, if
you create them by transforming a selection into a path, or by
transforming text into a path, the result can easily contain hundreds or
even thousands of anchor points.

A path may contain multiple *components*. A "component" is a part of a
path whose anchor points are all connected to each other by path
segments. The ability to have multiple components in paths allows you to
convert them into selections having multiple disconnected parts.

Each component of a path can be either *open* or *closed*: "closed"
means that the last anchor point is connected to the first anchor point.
If you transform a path into a selection, any open components are
automatically converted into closed components by connecting the last
anchor point to the first anchor point with a straight line.

Path segments can be either straight or curved. A path is called
"polygonal" if all of its segments are straight. A new path segment is
always created straight; the handles for the anchor points are directly
on top of the anchor points, yielding handles of zero length, which
produces straight-line segments. Drag a handle away from an anchor point
to cause a segment to curve.

One nice thing about paths is that they use very few resources,
especially in comparison with images. Representing a path in RAM
requires storing only the coordinates of its anchors and handles.
Therefore, it is possible to have literally hundreds of paths in an
image without causing any significant stress to your system. Even a path
with thousands of segments consumes minimal resources in comparison to a
typical layer or channel.

Paths can be created and manipulated using the [Paths
tool](#gimp-tool-path).

## Paths and Selections {#gimp-using-paths-and-selections}

GIMP lets you transform the selection of an image into a path. It also
lets you transform paths into selections. For information about the
selection and how it works, see the
[Selection](#gimp-concepts-selection) section.

When you transform a selection into a path, the path closely follows the
["marching ants"](#glossary-marching-ants). Now, the selection is a
two-dimensional entity, but a path is a one-dimensional entity, so there
is no way to transform the selection into a path without losing
information. In fact, any information about partially selected areas
(i.e., feathering) are lost when a selection is turned into a path. If
the path is transformed back into a selection, the result is an
all-or-none selection, similar to what is obtained by executing
[Sharpen](#gimp-selection-sharpen) from the Select menu.

## Transforming Paths {#gimp-using-paths-transforming}

Each of the [Transform tools](#gimp-tools-transform) (Rotate, Scale,
Perspective, etc) can be set to act on a layer, selection, or path.
Select the transform tool in the toolbox, then select
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-layer.svg) layer,
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-selection.svg) selection, or
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-path.svg) path for the Transform option in
the tool\'s Tool Options dialog. This gives you a powerful set of
methods for altering the shapes of paths without affecting other
elements of the image.

By default a Transform tool, when it is set to affect paths, acts only
on the *active path* which is shown highlighted in the [Paths
Dialog](#gimp-path-dialog). You can make a transformation affect more
than one path by selecting additional paths. Selecting multiple paths is
done by using the mouse and Shift key, for adding a range of paths, or
Ctrl key, for adding or removing the clicked path.

## Stroking a Path {#gimp-using-paths-stroking}

<figure>
<img src="images/using/path-stroking-examples.png"
alt="The four paths from the top illustration, each stroked in a different way." />
<figcaption>Stroking paths</figcaption>
</figure>

Paths do not alter the appearance of the image pixel data unless they
are *stroked*, using [Edit \> Stroke Paths...]{.menuchoice} from the
main menu or the [Paths Dialog](#gimp-path-dialog) right-click menu, or
the "Stroke Path" button in the Tool Options dialog for the
[Paths](#gimp-tool-path) tool.

Choosing "Stroke Path" by any of these means brings up a dialog that
allows you to control the way the stroking is done. You can choose from
a wide variety of line styles, or you can stroke with any of the Paint
tools, including unusual ones such as the Clone tool, Smudge tool,
Eraser, etc.

<figure>
<img src="images/menus/edit/stroke-path.png"
alt="See ??? for more information." />
<figcaption>The Stroke Path dialog</figcaption>
</figure>

You can further increase the range of stroking effects by stroking a
path multiple times, or by using lines or brushes of different widths.
The possibilities for getting interesting effects in this way are almost
unlimited.

## Paths and Text {#gimp-using-paths-and-text}

<figure>
<p><img src="images/using/path-from-text.png"
alt="Text converted to a path and then transformed using the Perspective tool." /></p>
<p><img src="images/using/path-text-stroked.png"
alt="The path shown above, stroked with a fuzzy brush and then gradient-mapped using the Gradient Map filter with the “Yellow Contrast” gradient." /></p>
<figcaption>Text converted to a path</figcaption>
</figure>

A text item created using the [Text](#gimp-tool-text) tool can be
transformed into a path using the [Text to
Path](#gimp-text-tool-text-to-path) command in the context menu of the
Text tool. This can be useful for several purposes, including:

-   Stroking the path, which gives you many possibilities for fancy
    text.

-   More importantly, transforming the text. Converting text into a
    path, then transforming the path, and finally either stroking the
    path or converting it to a selection and filling it, often leads to
    much higher-quality results than rendering the text as a layer and
    transforming the pixel data.

You can also wrap text along an existing path using the [Text along
Path](#gimp-text-tool-text-along-path) command.

## Paths and SVG files {#gimp-using-paths-and-svg}

SVG, standing for "Scalable Vector Graphics", is a popular file format
for *vector graphics*, in which graphical elements are represented in a
resolution-independent format, in contrast to *raster graphics*; in
which graphical elements are represented as arrays of pixels. GIMP is
mainly a raster graphics program, but paths are vector entities.

Fortunately, paths are represented in SVG files in almost exactly the
same way they are represented in GIMP. This compatibility makes it
possible to store GIMP paths as SVG files without losing any
information. You can access this capability in the [Paths
Dialog](#gimp-path-dialog).

It also means that GIMP can create paths from SVG files saved in other
programs, such as Inkscape, a popular open-source vector graphics
application. This is nice because dedicated vector editing programs have
much more powerful path-manipulation tools than GIMP does. You can
import a path from an SVG file using the Paths dialog.

The SVG format handles many other graphical elements than just paths:
among other things, it handles figures such as squares, rectangles,
circles, ellipses, regular polygons, etc. GIMP cannot do anything with
these entities, but it can load them as paths.

::: note
Creating paths is not the only thing GIMP can do with SVG files. It can
also open SVG files as GIMP images, in the usual way.
:::
