# Working with Digital Camera Photos {#gimp-using-photography}

Photography

## Introduction {#gimp-using-photography-introduction}

One of the most common uses of GIMP is to fix digital camera images that
for some reason are less than perfect. Maybe the image is overexposed or
underexposed; maybe rotated a bit; maybe out of focus: these are all
common problems for which GIMP has good tools. The purpose of this
chapter is to give you an overview of those tools and the situations in
which they are useful. You will not find detailed tutorials here: in
most cases it is easier to learn how to use the tools by experimenting
with them than by reading about them. (Also, each tool is described more
thoroughly in the Help section devoted to it.) You will also not find
anything in this chapter about the multitude of \"special effects\" that
you can apply to an image using GIMP. You should be familiar with basic
GIMP concepts before reading this chapter, but you certainly don\'t need
to be an expert--if you are, you probably know most of this anyway. And
don\'t hesitate to experiment: GIMP\'s powerful \"undo\" system allows
you to recover from almost any mistake with a simple
[Ctrl+Z]{.keycombo}.

Most commonly the things that you want to do to clean up an imperfect
photo are of four types: improving the composition; improving the
colors; improving the sharpness; and removing artifacts or other
undesirable elements of the image.

## Improving Composition {#gimp-using-photography-improving}

### Rotating an Image {#gimp-using-photography-rotating}

It is easy, when taking a picture, to hold the camera not quite
perfectly vertical, resulting in a picture where things are tilted at an
angle. In GIMP, the way to fix this is to use the
[Rotate](#gimp-tool-rotate) tool. Activate this by clicking its icon
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-tool-rotate.svg) in the Toolbox, or by
pressing the [Shift+R]{.keycombo} while inside the image. Make sure the
Tool Options are visible, and at the top, make sure for "Transform:"
that the left button ("Transform Layer") is selected. If you then click
the mouse inside the image and drag it, you will see the image rotate as
you drag. When the image looks right, click Rotate or press Enter, and
the image will be rotated.

Now as a matter of fact, it isn\'t so easy to get things right by this
method: you often find that things are better but not quite perfect. One
solution is to rotate a bit more, but there is a disadvantage to that
approach. Each time you rotate an image, because the rotated pixels
don\'t line up precisely with the original pixels, the image inevitably
gets blurred a little bit. For a single rotation, the amount of blurring
is quite small, but two rotations cause twice as much blurring as one,
and there is no reason to blur things more than you have to. A better
alternative is to undo the rotation and then do another, adjusting the
angle.

Fortunately, GIMP provides another way of doing it that is considerably
easier to use: in the Rotate Tool Options, for the Transform Direction
you can select \"Corrective (Backward)\". When you do this, instead of
rotating the image to compensate for the error, you can rotate its frame
to *line up* with the error. If this seems confusing, try it and you
will see that it is quite straightforward.

After you have rotated an image, there will be unpleasant triangular
\"holes\" at the corners. One way to fix them is to create a background
that fills the holes with some unobtrusive or neutral color, but usually
a better solution is to crop the image. The greater the rotation, the
more cropping is required, so it is best to get the camera aligned as
well as possible when you take the picture in the first place.

### Cropping {#gimp-using-photography-cropping}

When you take a picture with a digital camera, you have some control
over what gets included in the image but often not as much as you would
like: the result is images that could benefit from trimming. Beyond
this, it is often possible to enhance the impact of an image by trimming
it so that the most important elements are placed at key points. A rule
of thumb, not always to be followed but good to keep in mind, is the
"rule of thirds", which says that maximum impact is obtained by placing
the center of interest one-third of the way across the image, both
widthwise and heightwise.

To crop an image, activate the [Crop](#gimp-tool-crop) tool in the
Toolbox, or by pressing [Shift+ +C]{.keycombo} while inside the image.
With the tool active, clicking and dragging in the image will sweep out
a crop rectangle. When everything is perfect, hit Enter. Note: if Delete
cropped pixels in Crop Tool Options is disabled, the cropped part will
not be removed from the image, only the visible image area will be
adjusted.

## Improving Colors {#gimp-using-photography-colors}

### Automated Tools {#gimp-using-photography-automatic}

In spite of sophisticated exposure-control systems, pictures taken with
digital cameras often come out over- or under-exposed, or with color
casts due to imperfections in lighting. GIMP gives you a variety of
tools to correct colors in an image, ranging to automated tools that run
with a simple button-click to highly sophisticated tools that give you
many parameters of control. We will start with the simplest first.

GIMP gives you several automated color correction tools. Unfortunately
they don\'t usually give you quite the results you are looking for, but
they only take a moment to try out, and if nothing else they often give
you an idea of some of the possibilities inherent in the image. Except
for \"Auto Levels\", you can find these tools by following the menu path
[Colors \> Auto]{.menuchoice} in the main menu.

Here they are, with a few words about each:

Equalize

:   This is a very powerful adjustment that tries to spread the colors
    in the image evenly across the range of possible intensities. In
    some cases the effect is amazing, bringing out contrasts that are
    very difficult to get in any other way; but more commonly, it just
    makes the image look weird. Oh well, it only takes a moment to try.

White balance

:   This may enhance images with poor white or black by removing little
    used colors and stretch the remaining range as much as possible.

Stretch Contrast

:   This is useful for underexposed images: it adjusts the whole image
    until the brightest point is right at the saturation limit, and the
    darkest point is black. The downside is that the amount of
    brightening is determined entirely by the lightest and darkest
    points in the image, so even one single white pixel and/or one
    single black pixel will make normalization ineffective. It operates
    on the red, green, and blue channels independently. It often has the
    useful effect of reducing color casts.

Stretch Contrast HSV

:   Does the same as Stretch Contrast but works in HSV color space,
    rather than RGB color space. It preserves the Hue.

Color Enhance

:   This command increases the saturation range of the colors in the
    layer, without altering brightness or hue. So this command does not
    work on grayscale images.

Auto Levels

:   This is done by selecting [Colors \> Levels...]{.menuchoice} in the
    main menu, and then pressing the Auto Input Levels button near the
    center of the dialog. You will see a preview of the result; you must
    press Okay for it to take effect. Pressing Cancel instead will cause
    your image to revert to its previous state.

    If you can find a point in the image that ought to be perfect white,
    and a second point that ought to be perfect black, then you can use
    the Levels tool to do a semi-automatic adjustment that will often do
    a good job of fixing both brightness and colors throughout the
    image. First, bring up the Levels tool as previously described. Now,
    look down near the bottom of the Levels dialog for three buttons
    with symbols on them that look like eye-droppers (at least, that is
    what they are supposed to look like). The one on the left, if you
    mouse over it, shows its function to be "Pick Black Point". Click on
    this, then click on a point in the image that ought to be
    black--really truly perfectly black, not just sort of dark--and
    watch the image change. Next, click on the rightmost of the three
    buttons ( "Pick White Point" ), and then click a point in the image
    that ought to be white, and once more watch the image change. If you
    are happy with the result, click the Okay button otherwise Cancel.

Those are the automated color adjustments: if you find that none of them
quite does the job for you, it is time to try one of the interactive
color tools. All of these, except one, can be accessed via [Colors \>
Auto]{.menuchoice} in the main menu.

### Exposure Problems {#gimp-using-photography-exposure}

The simplest tool to use is the
[Brightness/Contrast](#gimp-tool-brightness-contrast) tool. It is also
the least powerful, but in many cases it does everything you need. This
tool is often useful for images that are overexposed or underexposed; it
is not useful for correcting color casts. The tool gives you two sliders
to adjust, for "Brightness" and "Contrast". If you have the option
"Preview" checked (and almost certainly you should), you will see any
adjustments you make reflected in the image. When you are happy with the
results, press Okay and they will take effect. If you can\'t get results
that you are happy with, press Cancel and the image will revert to its
previous state.

A more sophisticated, and only slightly more difficult, way of
correcting exposure problems is to use the Levels tool. The dialog for
this tool looks very complicated, but for the basic usage we have in
mind here, the only part you need to deal with is the "Input Levels"
area, specifically the three triangular sliders that appear below the
histogram. We refer you to the [Levels Tool Help](#gimp-tool-levels) for
instructions; but actually the easiest way to learn how to use it is to
experiment by moving the three sliders around, and watching how the
image is affected. (Make sure that "Preview" is checked at the bottom of
the dialog.)

A very powerful way of correcting exposure problems is to use the
*Curves* tool. This tool allows you to click and drag control points on
a curve, in order to create a function mapping input brightness levels
to output brightness levels. The Curves tool can replicate any effect
you can achieve with Brightness/Contrast or the Levels tool, so it is
more powerful than either of them. Once again, we refer you to the
[Curves Tool Help](#gimp-tool-curves) for detailed instructions, but the
easiest way to learn how to use it is by experimenting.

The most powerful approach to adjusting brightness and contrast across
an image, for more expert GIMP users, is to create a new layer above the
one you are working on, and then in the Layers dialog set the Mode for
the upper layer to "Multiply". The new layer then serves as a "gain
control" layer for the layer below it, with white yielding maximum gain
and black yielding a gain of zero. Thus, by painting on the new layer,
you can selectively adjust the gain for each area of the image, giving
you very fine control. You should try to paint only with smooth
gradients, because sudden changes in gain will give rise to spurious
edges in the result. Paint only using shades of gray, not colors, unless
you want to produce color shifts in the image.

Actually, "Multiply" is not the only mode that is useful for gain
control. In fact, "Multiply" mode can only darken parts of an image,
never lighten them, so it is only useful where some parts of an image
are overexposed. Using "Divide" mode has the opposite effect: it can
brighten areas of an image but not darken them. Here is a trick that is
often useful for bringing out the maximum amount of detail across all
areas of an image:

-   Duplicate the layer (producing a new layer above it).

-   Desaturate the new layer.

-   Apply a Gaussian blur to the result, with a large radius (100 or
    more).

-   Set Mode in the Layers dialog to Divide.

-   Control the amount of correction by adjusting opacity in the Layers
    dialog, or by using Brightness/Contrast, Levels, or Curves tools on
    the new layer.

-   When you are happy with the result, you can use Merge Down to
    combine the control layer and the original layer into a single
    layer.

In addition to "Multiply" and "Divide", you may every so often get
useful effects with other layer combination modes, such as "Dodge",
"Burn", or "Soft Light". It is all too easy, though, once you start
playing with these things, to look away from the computer for a moment
and suddenly find that you have just spent an hour twiddling parameters.
Be warned: the more options you have, the harder it is to make a
decision.

### Adjusting Hue and Saturation {#gimp-using-photography-hue-saturation}

In our experience, if your image has a color cast---too much red, too
much blue, etc---the easiest way to correct it is to use the Levels
tool, adjusting levels individually on the red, green, and blue
channels. If this doesn\'t work for you, it might be worth your while to
try the Color Balance tool or the Curves tool, but these are much more
difficult to use effectively. (They are very good for creating certain
types of special effects, though.)

Sometimes it is hard to tell whether you have adjusted colors
adequately. A good, objective technique is to find a point in the image
that you know should be either white or a shade of gray. Activate the
[Color Picker](#gimp-tool-color-picker) tool (the eyedropper symbol in
the Toolbox), and Shift-click on the aforesaid point: this brings up the
Color Picker dialog. If the colors are correctly adjusted, then the red,
green, and blue components of the reported color should all be equal; if
not, then you should see what sort of adjustment you need to make. This
technique, when well used, allows even color-blind people to
color-correct an image.

If your image is washed out---which can easily happen when you take
pictures in bright light---try the
[Hue/Saturation](#gimp-tool-hue-saturation) tool, which gives you three
sliders to manipulate, for Hue, Lightness, and Saturation. Raising the
saturation will probably make the image look better. In some cases it is
useful to adjust the lightness at the same time. ( "Lightness" here is
similar to "Brightness" in the Brightness/Contrast tool, except that
they are formed from different combinations of the red, green, and blue
channels.) The Hue/Saturation tool gives you the option of adjusting
restricted subranges of colors (using the buttons at the top of the
dialog), but if you want to get natural-looking colors, in most cases
you should avoid doing this.

::: tip
Even if an image does not seemed washed out, often you can increase its
impact by pushing up the saturation a bit. Veterans of the film era
sometimes call this trick "Fujifying", after Fujichrome film, which is
notorious for producing highly saturated prints.
:::

When you take pictures in low light conditions, in some cases you have
the opposite problem: too much saturation. In this case too the
Hue/Saturation tool is a good one to use, only by reducing the
saturation instead of increasing it.

## Adjusting Sharpness {#gimp-using-photography-sharpness}

### Unblurring {#gimp-using-photography-unblurring}

If the focus on the camera is not set perfectly, or the camera is moving
when the picture is taken, the result is a blurred image. If there is a
lot of blurring, you probably won\'t be able to do much about it with
any technique, but if there is only a moderate amount, you should be
able to improve the image.

The most generally useful technique for sharpening a fuzzy image is
called the [Sharpen (Unsharp Mask)](#gimp-filter-unsharp-mask). In spite
of the rather confusing name, which derives from its origins as a
technique used by film developers, its result is to make the image
sharper, not "unsharp". It is a plug-in, and you can access it via
[Filters \> Enhance \> Sharpen (Unsharp Mask)...]{.menuchoice} in the
main menu. There are two parameters, "Radius" and "Amount". The default
values often work pretty well, so you should try them first. Increasing
either the radius or the amount increases the strength of the effect.
Don\'t get carried away, though: if you make the unsharp mask too
strong, it will amplify noise in the image and also give rise to visible
artifacts where there are sharp edges.

::: tip
Sometimes using Sharpen (Unsharp Mask) can cause color distortion where
there are strong contrasts in an image. When this happens, you can often
get better results by decomposing the image into separate
Hue-Saturation-Value (HSV) layers, and running Sharpen (Unsharp Mask) on
the Value layer only, then recomposing. This works because the human eye
has much finer resolution for brightness than for color. See the
sections on [Decompose](#plug-in-decompose) and
[Compose](#plug-in-compose) for more information.
:::

In some situations, you may be able to get useful results by selectively
sharpening specific parts of an image using the
[Blur/Sharpen](#gimp-tool-convolve) tool from the Toolbox, in
\"Sharpen\" mode. This allows you to increase the sharpness in areas by
painting over them with any paintbrush. You should be restrained about
this, though, or the results will not look very natural: sharpening
increases the apparent sharpness of edges in the image, but also
amplifies noise.

### Reducing Graininess {#gimp-using-photography-graininess}

When you take pictures in low-light conditions or with a very fast
exposure time, the camera does not get enough data to make good
estimates of the true color at each pixel, and consequently the
resulting image looks grainy. You can "smooth out" the graininess by
blurring the image, but then you will also lose sharpness. There are a
couple of approaches that may give better results. Probably the best, if
the graininess is not too bad, is to use the filter called [Selective
Gaussian Blur](#gimp-filter-gaussian-blur-selective), setting the
blurring radius to 1 or 2 pixels. The other approach is to use the
[Despeckle](#plug-in-despeckle) filter. This has a nice preview, so you
can play with the settings and try to find some that give good results.
When graininess is really bad, though, it is often very difficult to fix
by anything except heroic measures (i.e., retouching with paint tools).

### Softening {#gimp-using-photography-softening}

Every so often you have the opposite problem: an image is *too* crisp.
The solution is to blur it a bit: fortunately blurring an image is much
easier than sharpening it. Since you probably don\'t want to blur it
very much, the simplest method is to use one of the "Blur" filters,
accessed via [Filters \> Blur]{.menuchoice} from the main menu. This
will soften the focus of the image a little bit. If you want more
softening, just repeat until you get the result you desire.

## Removing Unwanted Objects from an Image {#gimp-using-photography-retouching}

There are two kinds of objects you might want to remove from an image:
first, artifacts caused by junk such as dust or hair on the lens;
second, things that were really present but impair the quality of the
image, such as a telephone wire running across the edge of a beautiful
mountain landscape.

### Despeckling {#gimp-using-photography-despeckling}

A good tool for removing dust and other types of lens grunge is the
[Despeckle](#plug-in-despeckle) filter, accessed via [Filters \> Enhance
\> Despeckle...]{.menuchoice} from the main menu. Very important: to use
this filter effectively, you must begin by making a small selection
containing the artifact and a small area around it. The selection must
be small enough so that the artifact pixels are statistically
distinguishable from the other pixels inside the selection. If you try
to run despeckle on the whole image, you will hardly ever get anything
useful. Once you have created a reasonable selection, activate
Despeckle, and watch the preview as you adjust the parameters. If you
are lucky, you will be able to find a setting that removes the junk
while minimally affecting the area around it. The more the junk stands
out from the area around it, the better your results are likely to be.
If it isn\'t working for you, it might be worthwhile to cancel the
filter, create a different selection, and then try again.

If you have more than one artifact in the image, it is necessary to use
Despeckle on each individually.

### Garbage Removal {#gimp-using-photography-garbage}

The most useful method for removing unwanted "clutter" from an image is
the [Clone](#gimp-tool-clone)
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-tool-clone.svg) tool, which allows you to
paint over one part of an image using pixel data taken from another part
(or even from a different image). The trick to using the clone tool
effectively is to be able to find a different part of the image that can
be used to "copy over" the unwanted part: if the area surrounding the
unwanted object is very different from the rest of the image, you won\'t
have much luck. For example, if you have a lovely beach scene, with a
nasty human walking across the beach who you would like to teleport
away, you will probably be able to find an empty part of the beach that
looks similar to the part he is walking across, and use it to clone over
him. It is quite astonishing how natural the results can look when this
technique works well.

Consult the [Clone Tool Help](#gimp-tool-clone) for more detailed
instructions. Cloning is as much an art as a science, and the more you
practice at it, the better you will get. At first it may seem impossible
to produce anything except ugly blotches, but persistence will pay off.

Another tool looking very much as the clone tool, but smarter, is the
[healing tool](#gimp-tool-heal) which also takes the area around the
destination into account when cloning. A typical usage is removal of
wrinkles and other minor errors in images.

In some cases you may be able to get good results by simply cutting out
the offending object from the image, and then using a plug-in called
"Resynthesizer" to fill in the void. This plug-in is not included with
the main GIMP distribution, but it can be obtained from the author\'s
web site [???](#bibliography-online-plugin-resynthesizer). As with many
things, your mileage may vary.

### Removing Red-eye {#gimp-using-photography-red-eye}

Red-eyes

When you take a flash picture of somebody who is looking directly toward
the camera, the iris of the eye can bounce the light of the flash back
toward the camera in such a way as to make the eye appear bright red:
this effect is called "red eye", and looks very bizarre. Many modern
cameras have special flash modes that minimize red-eye, but they only
work if you use them, and even then they don\'t always work perfectly.
Interestingly, the same effect occurs with animals, but the eyes may
show up as other colors, such as green.

GIMP provides a special [remove red eye](#gimp-filter-red-eye-removal)
filter. Make a selection with one of the selection tools of the red part
of the eye and then choose the "Red Eye Removal" filter. You may have to
fiddle around a bit with the threshold slider to get the right color.

## Saving Your Results {#gimp-using-photography-saving}

### Files {#gimp-using-photography-files}

What file format should you use to save the results of your work, and
should you resize it? The answers depend on what you intend to use the
image for.

-   If you intend to open the image in GIMP again for further work, you
    should save it in GIMP\'s native XCF format (i. e., name it
    something.xcf), because this is the only format that guarantees that
    none of the information in the image is lost.

-   If you intend to print the image on paper, you should avoid
    shrinking the image, except by cropping it. The reason is that
    printers are capable of achieving much higher resolutions than video
    monitors --- 600 to 1400 dpi ("dots per inch", the physical density)
    for typical printers, as compared to 72 to 100 pixels per inch for
    monitors. A 3000×5000-pixel image looks huge on a monitor, but it
    only comes to about 5 inches by 8 inches on paper at 600 ppi. There
    is usually no good reason to *expand* the image either: you can\'t
    increase the true resolution that way, and it can always be scaled
    up at the time it is printed. As for the file format, it will
    usually be fine to use JPEG at a quality level of 75 to 85. In rare
    cases, where there are large swaths of nearly uniform color, you may
    need to set the quality level even higher or use a lossless format
    such as TIFF instead.

-   If you intend to display the image on screen or project it with a
    video projector, bear in mind the highest screen resolutions for
    most commonly available systems. There is nothing to gain by keeping
    the image much larger than these resolutions. For this purpose, the
    JPEG format is almost always a good choice.

-   If you want to put the image on a web page or send it by email, it
    is a good idea to make every effort to keep the file size as small
    as possible. First, scale the image down to the smallest size that
    makes it possible to see the relevant details (bear in mind that
    other people may be using different sized monitors and/or different
    monitor resolution settings). Second, export the image as a JPEG
    file. In the JPEG export dialog, check the option to "Preview in
    image window", and then adjust the Quality slider to the lowest
    level that gives you acceptable image quality. (You will see in the
    image the effects of each change.) Make sure that the image is
    zoomed at 1:1 while you do this, so you are not misled by the
    effects of zooming.

See the [File Formats](#gimp-using-fileformats) section for more
information.

### Printing Your Photos {#gimp-using-photography-printing}

Printing

Printing your photos

You print photos from the main menu through [File \>
Print...]{.menuchoice}. However it is very useful to keep in mind some
elementary concepts to prevent some unpleasant surprises when looking at
the result, or to fix them if they occur. You must always remember:

-   that image displayed on the screen is in RGB mode and printing will
    be in CMYK mode; consequently color feature you\'ll get on printed
    sheet will not be exactly what you was waiting for. That depends on
    the used corresponding chart. For the curious ones some adding
    explanations can be got through a click on these useful Wikipedia
    links:

    -   ICC-Profile [???](#bibliography-online-wkpd-icc)

    -   CMYK [???](#bibliography-online-wkpd-cmyk)

    -   Gamut [???](#bibliography-online-wkpd-gamut)

-   that a screen resolution is roughly within a range from 75 up to 100
    dpi; a printer resolution is about 10x higher (or more) than a
    screen one; printed image size depends on available pixels and
    resolution; so actual printed size doesn\'t correspond inevitably to
    what is displayed on screen nor available sheet size.

Consequently, before any printing, go to [Image \> Print
Size...]{.menuchoice} and choose a convenient output size in the
"Print Size" box adjusting either sizes or resolution. The
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-vchain.svg) symbol shows that the both
values are linked. You can dissociate x and y resolution by clicking on
that symbol, but it is risky. Only some printers support different X vs.
Y resolutions.

Last recommendation: think of checking your margins as well as
centering. It would be a pity if a too large margin cuts off some part
of your image or if an inappropriate centering damages your work
especially if you use a special photo paper.

### EXIF Data {#gimp-using-photography-exif}

Digital cameras, when you take a picture, add information to your image
about the camera settings and the circumstances under which the picture
was taken. This so-called metadata is included in most image files in a
structured format called EXIF.

GIMP stores all metadata it can handle when loading an image. When
exporting your image, you can select which types of metadata you want
included. Not all file formats support all types of metadata. For JPEG
files, EXIF metadata will be included if enabled in the export dialog.
Besides values that directly depend on changes you made to your image
(e.g. dimensions) most values will be saved unchanged from when the
image was loaded.

You can view the contents of the EXIF, XMP and IPTC metadata, by using
the [metadata-viewer](#plug-in-metadata-viewer) plug-in. You can access
it via [Image \> Metadata \> View Metadata]{.menuchoice} from the main
menu.
