# A Script-Fu Tutorial {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial}

Script-Fu

Tutorial

In this training course, we\'ll introduce you to the fundamentals of
Scheme necessary to use Script-Fu, and then build a handy script that
you can add to your toolbox of scripts. The script prompts the user for
some text, then creates a new image sized perfectly to the text. We will
then enhance the script to allow for a buffer of space around the text.
We will conclude with a few suggestions for ways to ramp up your
knowledge of Script-Fu.

::: note
This section was adapted from a tutorial written for the GIMP 1 User
Manual by Mike Terry.
:::

## Getting Acquainted With Scheme {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-scheme}

### Start with Scheme

[Scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scheme_(programming_language)) is
a dialect of the Lisp family of programming languages. GIMP uses
TinyScheme, which is a lightweight interpreter of a subset of the
so-called R5RS standard.

The first thing to learn is that:

> Every statement in Scheme is surrounded by parentheses ().

The second thing you need to know is that:

> The function name/operator is always the first item in the
> parentheses, and the rest of the items are parameters to the function.

However, not everything enclosed in parentheses is a function --- they
can also be items in a list --- but we\'ll get to that later. This
notation is referred to as prefix notation, because the function
prefixes everything else. If you\'re familiar with postfix notation, or
own a calculator that uses Reverse Polish Notation (such as most HP
calculators), you should have no problem adapting to formulating
expressions in Scheme.

The third thing to understand is that:

> Mathematical operators are also considered functions, and thus are
> listed first when writing mathematical expressions.

This follows logically from the prefix notation that we just mentioned.

### Examples Of Prefix, Infix, And Postfix Notations

Here are some quick examples illustrating the differences between
*prefix*, *infix*, and *postfix* notations. We\'ll add a 1 and 23
together:

-   Prefix notation: `+ 1 23` (the way Scheme will want it)

-   Infix notation: `1 + 23` (the way we "normally" write it)

-   Postfix notation: `1 23 +` (the way many HP calculators will want
    it)

### Practicing In Scheme

In GIMP, select [Filters \> Development \> Script-Fu \> Script-Fu
Console]{.menuchoice} from the main menu. This will start up the
Script-Fu Console window, which allows us to work interactively in
Scheme.

### The Script-Fu Console Window {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-console}

At the bottom of this window is a text entry field for commands. Here,
we can test out simple Scheme commands interactively. Let\'s start out
easy, and add some numbers:

    (+ 3 5)

Typing this in and hitting Enter yields the expected answer of 8 in the
center window.

![Use Script-Fu Console.](images/using/script-fu-console.png)

The "+" function can take more arguments, so we can add more than one
number:

    (+ 3 5 6)

This also yields the expected answer of 14.

So far, so good --- we type in a Scheme statement and it\'s executed
immediately in the Script-Fu Console window. Now for a word of
caution...

### Watch Out For Extra Parentheses

If you\'re like me, you\'re used to being able to use extra parentheses
whenever you want to --- like when you\'re typing a complex mathematical
equation and you want to separate the parts by parentheses to make it
clearer when you read it. In Scheme, you have to be careful and not
insert these extra parentheses incorrectly. For example, say we wanted
to add 3 to the result of adding 5 and 6 together:

    3 + (5 + 6) + 7 = ?

Knowing that the + operator can take a list of numbers to add, you might
be tempted to convert the above to the following:

    (+ 3 (5 6) 7)

However, this is incorrect --- remember, every statement in Scheme
starts and ends with parens, so the Scheme interpreter will think that
you\'re trying to call a function named "5" in the second group of
parens, rather than summing those numbers before adding them to 3.

The correct way to write the above statement would be:

    (+ 3 (+ 5 6) 7)

### Make Sure You Have The Proper Spacing, Too

If you are familiar with other programming languages, like C/C++, Perl
or Java, you know that you don\'t need white space around mathematical
operators to properly form an expression:

            3+5, 3 +5, 3+ 5
          

These are all accepted by C/C++, Perl and Java compilers. However, the
same is not true for Scheme. You must have a space after a mathematical
operator (or any other function name or operator) in Scheme for it to be
correctly interpreted by the Scheme interpreter.

Practice a bit with simple mathematical equations in the Script-Fu
Console until you\'re totally comfortable with these initial concepts.

## Variables And Functions {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-identifier}

Now that we know that every Scheme statement is enclosed in parentheses,
and that the function name/operator is listed first, we need to know how
to create and use variables, and how to create and use functions. We\'ll
start with the variables.

### Declaring Variables

Although there are a couple of different methods for declaring
variables, the preferred method is to use the `let*` construct. If
you\'re familiar with other programming languages, this construct is
equivalent to defining a list of local variables and a scope in which
they\'re active. As an example, to declare two variables, a and b,
initialized to 1 and 2, respectively, you\'d write:

            (let*
               (
                  (a 1)
                  (b 2)
               )
               (+ a b)
            )
          

or, as one line:

    (let* ( (a 1) (b 2) ) (+ a b) )

::: note
You\'ll have to put all of this on one line if you\'re using the console
window. In general, however, you\'ll want to adopt a similar practice of
indentation to help make your scripts more readable. We\'ll talk a bit
more about this in the section on White Space.
:::

This declares two local variables, a and b, initializes them, then
prints the sum of the two variables.

### What Is A Local Variable?

You\'ll notice that we wrote the summation `(+ a b)` within the parens
of the `let*` expression, not after it.

This is because the `let*` statement defines an area in your script in
which the declared variables are usable; if you type the `(+ a b)`
statement after the `(let* â€¦)` statement, you\'ll get an error, because
the declared variables are only valid within the context of the `let*`
statement; they are what programmers call local variables.

### The General Syntax Of `let*`

The general form of a `let*` statement is:

            (let* ( variables )
              expressions )
          

where variables are declared within parens, e.g., `(a 2)`, and
expressions are any valid Scheme expressions. Remember that the
variables declared here are only valid within the `let*` statement ---
they\'re local variables.

### White Space

Previously, we mentioned the fact that you\'ll probably want to use
indentation to help clarify and organize your scripts. This is a good
policy to adopt, and is not a problem in Scheme --- white space is
ignored by the Scheme interpreter, and can thus be liberally applied to
help clarify and organize the code within a script. However, if you\'re
working in Script-Fu\'s Console window, you\'ll have to enter an entire
expression on one line; that is, everything between the opening and
closing parens of an expression must come on one line in the Script-Fu
Console window.

### Assigning A New Value To A Variable

Once you\'ve initialized a variable, you might need to change its value
later on in the script. Use the `set!` statement to change the
variable\'s value:

            (let* ( (theNum 10) ) (set! theNum (+ theNum theNum)) )
          

Try to guess what the above statement will do, then go ahead and enter
it in the Script-Fu Console window.

### Functions

Now that you\'ve got the hang of variables, let\'s get to work with some
functions. You declare a function with the following syntax:

            (define
               (
                  name
                  param-list
               )
               expressions
            )
          

where \<name\> is the name assigned to this function, \<param-list\> is
a space-delimited list of parameter names, and \<expressions\> is a
series of expressions that the function executes when it\'s called. For
example:

    (define (AddXY inX inY) (+ inX inY) )

`AddXY` is the function\'s name and `inX` and `inY` are the variables.
This function takes its two parameters and adds them together.

If you\'ve programmed in other imperative languages (like C/C++, Java,
Pascal, etc.), you might notice that a couple of things are absent in
this function definition when compared to other programming languages.

-   First, notice that the parameters don\'t have any "types" (that is,
    we didn\'t declare them as strings, or integers, etc.). Scheme is a
    type-less language. This is handy and allows for quicker script
    writing.

-   Second, notice that we don\'t need to worry about how to "return"
    the result of our function --- the last statement is the value
    "returned" when calling this function. Type the function into the
    console, then try something like:

        (AddXY (AddXY 5 6) 4)

## Lists, Lists And More Lists {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-lists}

We\'ve trained you in variables and functions, and now enter the murky
swamps of Scheme\'s lists.

### Defining A List

Before we talk more about lists, it is necessary that you know the
difference between atomic values and lists.

You\'ve already seen atomic values when we initialized variables in the
previous lesson. An atomic value is a single value. So, for example, we
can assign the variable "`x`" the single value of 8 in the following
statement:

    (let* ( (x 8) ) x)

(We added the expression `x` at the end to print out the value assigned
to `x`---normally you won\'t need to do this. Notice how `let*` operates
just like a function: The value of the last statement is the value
returned.)

A variable may also refer to a list of values, rather than a single
value. To assign the variable `x` the list of values 1, 3, 5, we\'d
type:

    (let* ( (x '(1 3 5))) x)

Try typing both statements into the Script-Fu Console and notice how it
replies. When you type the first statement in, it simply replies with
the result:

    8

However, when you type in the other statement, it replies with the
following result:

    (1 3 5)

When it replies with the value 8 it is informing you that `x` contains
the atomic value 8. However, when it replies with `(1 3 5)`, it is then
informing you that `x` contains not a single value, but a list of
values. Notice that there are no commas in our declaration or assignment
of the list, nor in the printed result.

The syntax to define a list is:

    '(a b c)

where `a`, `b`, and `c` are literals. We use the apostrophe (`'`) to
indicate that what follows in the parentheses is a list of literal
values, rather than a function or expression.

An empty list can be defined as such:

    '()

or simply:

    ()

Lists can contain atomic values, as well as other lists:

    (let*
       (
            (x
               '("GIMP" (1 2 3) ("is" ("great" () ) ) )
            )
        )
        x
    )
          

Notice that after the first apostrophe, you no longer need to use an
apostrophe when defining the inner lists. Go ahead and copy the
statement into the Script-Fu Console and see what it returns.

You should notice that the result returned is not a list of single,
atomic values; rather, it is a list of a literal `("GIMP")`, the list
`(1 2 3)`, etc.

### How To Think Of Lists

It\'s useful to think of lists as composed of a "head" and a "tail". The
head is the first element of the list, the tail the rest of the list.
You\'ll see why this is important when we discuss how to add to lists
and how to access elements in the list.

### Creating Lists Through Concatenation (The Cons Function)

One of the more common functions you\'ll encounter is the cons function.
It takes a value and places it to its second argument, a list. From the
previous section, I suggested that you think of a list as being composed
of an element (the head) and the remainder of the list (the tail). This
is exactly how cons functions --- it adds an element to the head of a
list. Thus, you could create a list as follows:

    (cons 1 '(2 3 4) )

The result is the list `(1 2 3 4)`.

You could also create a list with one element:

    (cons 1 () )

You can use previously declared variables in place of any literals, as
you would expect.

### Defining A List Using The `list` Function

To define a list composed of literals or previously declared variables,
use the `list` function:

    (list 5 4 3 a b c)

This will compose and return a list containing the values held by the
variables `a`, `b` and `c`. For example:

            (let*  (
                      (a 1)
                      (b 2)
                      (c 3)
                   )

                   (list 5 4 3 a b c)
            )
          

This code creates the list `(5 4 3 1 2 3)`.

### Accessing Values In A List

To access the values in a list, use the functions `car` and `cdr`, which
return the first element of the list and the rest of the list,
respectively. These functions break the list down into the head::tail
construct I mentioned earlier.

### The `car` Function

`car` returns the first element of the list (the head of the list). The
list needs to be non-null (not empty). Thus, the following returns the
first element of the list:

    (car '("first" 2 "third"))

which is:

    "first"

### The `cdr` function

`cdr` returns the remainder of the list after the first element (the
tail of the list). If there is only one element in the list, it returns
an empty list.

    (cdr '("first" 2 "third"))

returns:

    (2 "third")

whereas the following:

    (cdr '("one and only"))

returns:

    ()

### Accessing Other Elements In A List

OK, great, we can get the first element in a list, as well as the rest
of the list, but how do we access the second, third or other elements of
a list? There exist several \"convenience\" functions to access, for
example, the head of the head of the tail of a list (`caadr`), the tail
of the tail of a list (`cddr`), etc.

The basic naming convention is easy: The a\'s and d\'s represent the
heads and tails of lists, so

    (car (cdr (car x) ) )

could be written as:

    (cadar x)

To get some practice with list-accessing functions, try typing in the
following (except all on one line if you\'re using the console); use
different variations of `car` and `cdr` to access the different elements
of the list:

            (let* (
                     (x  '( (1 2 (3 4 5) 6)  7  8  (9 10) )
                     )
                  )
                  ; place your car/cdr code here
            )
          

Try accessing the number 3 in the list using only two function calls. If
you can do that, you\'re on your way to becoming a Script-Fu Master!

::: note
In Scheme, a semicolon (`;`) marks the beginning of a comment. It, and
everything that follows it on the same line, are ignored by the script
interpreter, so you can use this to add comments to refresh your memory
when you look at the script later.
:::

## Your First Script-Fu Script {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-first-script}

Do you not need to stop and catch your breath? No? Well then, let\'s
proceed with your fourth lesson --- your first Script-Fu Script.

### Creating A Text Box Script

One of the most common operations I perform in GIMP is creating a box
with some text in it for a web page, a logo or whatever. However, you
never quite know how big to make the initial image when you start out.
You don\'t know how much space the text will fill with the font and font
size you want.

This problem can be solved and automated with Script-Fu.

We will, therefore, create a script, called Text Box, which creates an
image correctly sized to fit snugly around a line of text the user
inputs. We\'ll also let the user choose the font, font size and text
color.

### Editing And Storing Your Scripts

Up until now, we\'ve been working in the Script-Fu Console. Now,
however, we\'re going to switch to editing script files. Script files
should be plain text files that you can edit in a text or code editor.
The name you give is not that important, except for being able to
recognize the script. You should give your script file the extension
".scm".

Where you place your scripts is a matter of preference. In GIMP\'s
[folder preferences](#gimp-prefs-folders-scripts) you can see in which
folders GIMP looks for scripts. It is also possible to add a new folder
there. The folder where GIMP stores its own scripts is usually not the
best choice for your scripts, but for the rest feel free to choose what
suits you best.

### The Bare Essentials

Every Script-Fu script defines at least one function, which is the
script\'s main function. This is where you do the work.

Every script must also register with the procedural database, so you can
access it within GIMP.

We\'ll define the main function first:

            (define (script-fu-text-box inText inFont inFontSize inTextColor))
          

Here, we\'ve defined a new function called `script-fu-text-box` that
takes four parameters, which will later correspond to some text, a font,
the font size, and the text\'s color. The function is currently empty
and thus does nothing. So far, so good --- nothing new, nothing fancy.

### Naming Conventions

Scheme\'s naming conventions seem to prefer lowercase letters with
hyphens, which I\'ve followed in the naming of the function. However,
I\'ve departed from the convention with the parameters. I like more
descriptive names for my parameters and variables, and thus add the
\"in\" prefix to the parameters so I can quickly see that they\'re
values passed into the script, rather than created within it. I use the
prefix \"the\" for variables defined within the script.

It\'s GIMP convention to name your script functions `script-fu-abc`,
because then when they\'re listed in the procedural database, they\'ll
all show up under Script-Fu when you\'re listing the functions. This
also helps distinguish them from plug-ins.

### Registering The Function

Now, let\'s register the function with GIMP. This is done by calling the
function `script-fu-register`. When GIMP reads in a script, it will
execute this function, which registers the script with the procedural
database. You can place this function call wherever you wish in your
script, but I usually place it at the end, after all my other code.

Here\'s the listing for registering this function (I will explain all
its parameters in a minute):

      (script-fu-register
        "script-fu-text-box"                        ;function name
        "Text Box"                                  ;menu label
        "Creates a simple text box, sized to fit\
          around the user's choice of text,\
          font, font size, and color."              ;description
        "Michael Terry"                             ;author
        "copyright 1997, Michael Terry;\
          2009, the GIMP Documentation Team"        ;copyright notice
        "October 27, 1997"                          ;date created
        ""                                      ;image type that the script works on
        SF-STRING      "Text"          "Text Box"   ;a string variable
        SF-FONT        "Font"          "Charter"    ;a font variable
        SF-ADJUSTMENT  "Font size"     '(50 1 1000 1 10 0 1)
                                                    ;a spin-button
        SF-COLOR       "Color"         '(0 0 0)     ;color variable
      )
      (script-fu-menu-register "script-fu-text-box" "<Image>/Filters/Tutorial")
          

Save these functions in a text file with a `.scm` suffix in a
subdirectory of your script directory, with the same name as your script
file, then restart GIMP. The new script will appear as [Filters \>
Tutorial \> Text Box]{.menuchoice}.

If you invoke this new script, it won\'t do anything, of course, but you
can view the prompts you created when registering the script (more
information about what we did is covered next).

Finally, if you invoke the Procedure Browser ( [Help \> Procedure
Browser]{.menuchoice}), you\'ll notice that our script now appears in
the database.

### Steps For Registering The Script

To register our script with GIMP, we call the function
`script-fu-register`, fill in the seven required parameters and add our
script\'s own parameters, along with a description and default value for
each parameter.

-   The *name* of the function we defined. This is the function called
    when our script is invoked (the entry-point into our script). This
    is necessary because we may define additional functions within the
    same file, and GIMP needs to know which of these functions to call.
    In our example, we only defined one function, text-box, which we
    registered.

-   The *menu label* is the name that will be shown in the menu. To
    specify the location, see [Registering the Menu
    Location](#script-fu-adding-menu-location).

-   A *description* of your script, to be displayed in the Procedure
    Browser.

-   *Your name* (the author of the script).

-   *Copyright* information.

-   The *date* the script was made, or the last revision of the script.

-   The *types* of images the script works on. This may be any of the
    following: RGB, RGBA, GRAY, GRAYA, INDEXED, INDEXEDA. Or it may be
    none at all --- in our case, we\'re creating an image, and thus
    don\'t need to define the type of image on which we work.

### Registering The Script\'s Parameters

Once we have listed the required parameters, we then need to list the
parameters that correspond to the parameters our script needs. When we
list these params, we give hints as to what their types are. This is for
the dialog which pops up when the user selects our script. We also
provide a default value.

This section of the registration process has the following format:

  Param Type      Description                                                                                                                                                                                                     Example
  --------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------
  `SF-IMAGE`      If your script operates on an open image, this should be the first parameter after the required parameters. GIMP will pass in a reference to the image in this parameter.                                       3
  `SF-DRAWABLE`   If your script operates on an open image, this should be the second parameter after the `SF-IMAGE` param. It refers to the active layer. GIMP will pass in a reference to the active layer in this parameter.   17
  `SF-STRING`     Accepts strings.                                                                                                                                                                                                \"Some text\"
  `SF-COLOR`      Indicates that a color is requested in this parameter.                                                                                                                                                          \'(0 102 255)
  `SF-TOGGLE`     A checkbox is displayed, to get a Boolean value.                                                                                                                                                                TRUE or FALSE

### Registering the Menu Location {#script-fu-adding-menu-location}

Once we have registered our script, we need to tell GIMP where it should
be found in the menu.

The best menu location of your script depends on its function. Most
scripts are found in the Filters and Colors menus.

For the current script, which creates a new image, we choose a submenu
of [Filters \> Tutorial]{.menuchoice}. This is what the line with the
`script-fu-menu-register` function does. Thus, we registered our Text
Box script here: [Filters \> Tutorial \> Text Box]{.menuchoice}.

Any submenu that you specify in your script that doesn\'t exist yet will
be automatically created by GIMP.

## Adding Additional Functionality {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-script}

Let us continue with our training and add some functionality to our
script.

### Creating A New Image

In the previous lesson, we created an empty function and registered it
with GIMP. In this lesson, we want to provide functionality to our
script --- we want to create a new image, add the user\'s text to it and
resize the image to fit the text exactly.

Once you know how to set variables, define functions and access list
members, the rest is all downhill --- all you need to do is familiarize
yourself with the functions available in GIMP\'s procedural database and
call those functions directly. Open the [???](#plug-in-dbbrowser).

Let\'s begin by making a new image. We\'ll create a new variable,
`theImage`, set to the result of calling GIMP\'s built-in function
`gimp-image-new`.

As you can see from the DB Browser, the function `gimp-image-new` takes
three parameters --- the image\'s width, height and the type of image.
Because we\'ll later resize the image to fit the text, we\'ll make a
10Ã—10 pixels RGB image. We\'ll store the image\'s width and sizes in
some variables, too, as we\'ll refer to and manipulate them later in the
script.

            (define (script-fu-text-box inText inFont inFontSize inTextColor)
            (let*
                  (
                     ; define our local variables
                     ; create a new image:
                     (theImageWidth  10)
                     (theImageHeight 10)
                     (theImage (car
                                    (gimp-image-new
                                     theImageWidth
                                     theImageHeight
                                     RGB
                                    )
                               )
                     )
                     (theText)     ;a declaration for the text
                                   ;we create later
          

Note: We used the value `RGB` to specify that the image is an RGB image.
We could have also used `0`, but RGB is more descriptive when we glance
at the code.

You should also notice that we took the head of the result of the
function call. This may seem strange, because the database explicitly
tells us that it returns only one value --- the ID of the newly created
image. However, all GIMP functions return a list, even if there is only
one element in the list, so we need to get the head of the list.

### Adding A New Layer To The Image

Now that we have an image, we need to add a layer to it. We\'ll call the
`gimp-layer-new` function to create the layer, passing in the ID of the
image we just created. (From now on, instead of listing the complete
function, we\'ll only list the lines we\'re adding to it. You can see
the complete script [here](#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-result).)
Because we\'ve declared all of the local variables we\'ll use, we\'ll
also close the parentheses marking the end of our variable declarations:

            ;create a new layer for the image:
               (theLayer
                         (car
                              (gimp-layer-new
                               theImage
                               "layer 1"
                               theImageWidth
                               theImageHeight
                               RGB-IMAGE
                               100
                               LAYER-MODE-NORMAL
                              )
                          )
                )
             ) ;end of our local variables
          

Once we have the new layer, we need to add it to the image:

            (gimp-image-insert-layer theImage theLayer 0 0)
          

Now, just for fun, let\'s see the fruits of our labors up until this
point, and add this line to show the new, empty image:

    (gimp-display-new theImage)

Save your work, restart GIMP, run the script and a new image should pop
up. It will probably contain garbage (random colors), because we
haven\'t erased it. We\'ll get to that in a second.

### Adding The Text

Go ahead and remove the line to display the image (or comment it out
with a (`;`) as the first character of the line).

Before we add text to the image, we need to set the background and
foreground colors so that the text appears in the color the user
specified. We\'ll use the gimp-context-set-back/foreground functions:

            (gimp-context-set-background '(255 255 255) )
            (gimp-context-set-foreground inTextColor)
          

With the colors properly set, let\'s now clean out the garbage currently
in the image by filling the drawable with the background color:

            (gimp-drawable-fill theLayer FILL-BACKGROUND)
          

With the image cleared, we\'re ready to add some text:

            (set! theText
                          (car
                               (gimp-text-font
                                theImage theLayer
                                0 0
                                inText
                                0
                                TRUE
                                inFontSize
                                inFont)
                           )
            )
          

Although a long function call, it\'s fairly straightforward if you go
over the parameters while looking at the function\'s entry in the DB
Browser. Basically, we\'re creating a new text layer and assigning it to
the variable `theText`.

Now that we have the text, we can grab its width and height and resize
the image and the image\'s layer to the text\'s size:

            (set! theImageWidth   (car (gimp-drawable-get-width  theText) ) )
            (set! theImageHeight  (car (gimp-drawable-get-height theText) ) )

            (gimp-image-resize theImage theImageWidth theImageHeight 0 0)

            (gimp-layer-resize theLayer theImageWidth theImageHeight 0 0)
          

If you\'re like me, you\'re probably wondering what a drawable is when
compared to a layer. The difference between the two is that a drawable
is anything that can be drawn into, including layers but also channels,
layer masks, the selection, etc; a layer is a more specific version of a
drawable. In most cases, the distinction is not important.

With the image ready to go, we can now re-add our display line:

            (gimp-display-new theImage)
          

Save your work, restart GIMP and give your first script a run!

### Clearing The Dirty Flag

If you try to close the image created without first saving the file,
GIMP will ask you if you want to save your work before you close the
image. It asks this because the image is marked as dirty, or unsaved. In
the case of our script, this is a nuisance for the times when we simply
give it a test run and don\'t add or change anything in the resulting
image --- that is, our work is easily reproducible in such a simple
script, so it makes sense to get rid of this dirty flag.

To do this, we can clear the dirty flag after displaying the image:

            (gimp-image-clean-all theImage)
          

This will set dirty count to 0, making it appear to be a "clean" image.

Whether to add this line or not is a matter of personal taste. I use it
in scripts that produce new images, where the results are trivial, as in
this case. If your script is very complicated, or if it works on an
existing image, you will probably not want to use this function.

## Extending The Text Box Script {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-extending-text-box}

### Handling Undo Correctly

When creating a script, you want to give your users the ability to undo
their actions, should they make a mistake. This is easily accomplished
by calling the functions `gimp-image-undo-group-start` and
`gimp-image-undo-group-end` around the code that manipulates the image.
You can think of them as matched statements that let GIMP know when to
start and stop recording manipulations on the image, so that those
manipulations can later be undone.

If you are creating a new image entirely, it doesn\'t make sense to use
these functions because you\'re not changing an existing image. However,
when you are changing an existing image, you most surely want to use
these functions.

Undoing a script works nearly flawlessly when using these functions.

### Extending The Script A Little More

Now that we have a very handy-dandy script to create text boxes, let\'s
add two features to it:

-   Currently, the image is resized to fit exactly around the text ---
    there\'s no room for anything, like drop shadows or special effects
    (even though many scripts will automatically resize the image as
    necessary). Let\'s add a buffer around the text, and even let the
    user specify how much buffer to add as a percentage of the size of
    the resultant text.

-   This script could easily be used in other scripts that work with
    text. Let\'s extend it so that it returns the image and the layers,
    so other scripts can call this script and use the image and layers
    we create.

### Modifying The Parameters And The Registration Function

To let the user specify the amount of buffer, we\'ll add a parameter to
our function and the registration function:

      (define (script-fu-text-box inTest inFont inFontSize inTextColor inBufferAmount)
      (let*
            (
               ; define our local variables
               ; create a new image:
               (theImageWidth  10)
               (theImageHeight 10)
               (theImage (car
                              (gimp-image-new
                               theImageWidth
                               theImageHeight
                               RGB
                              )
                         )
               )
               (theText)          ;a declaration for the text
                                  ;we create later

               (theBuffer)        ;added

               (theLayer
                         (car
                             (gimp-layer-new
                              theImage
                               "layer 1"
                              theImageWidth
                              theImageHeight
                              RGB-IMAGE
                              100
                              LAYER-MODE-NORMAL
                             )
                         )
               )
            ) ;end of our local variables

       [Code here]
     )
          

      (script-fu-register
        "script-fu-text-box"                        ;function name
        "Text Box"                                  ;menu label
        "Creates a simple text box, sized to fit\
          around the user's choice of text,\
          font, font size, and color."              ;description
        "Michael Terry"                             ;author
        "copyright 1997, Michael Terry;\
          2009, the GIMP Documentation Team"        ;copyright notice
        "October 27, 1997"                          ;date created
        ""                                      ;image type that the script works on
        SF-STRING      "Text"          "Text Box"   ;a string variable
        SF-FONT        "Font"          "Charter"    ;a font variable
        SF-ADJUSTMENT  "Font size"     '(50 1 1000 1 10 0 1)
                                                    ;a spin-button
        SF-COLOR       "Color"         '(0 0 0)     ;color variable
        SF-ADJUSTMENT  "Buffer amount" '(35 0 100 1 10 1 0)
                                                    ;a slider
      )
      (script-fu-menu-register "script-fu-text-box" "<Image>/Filters/Tutorial")
          

### Adding The New Code

We\'re going to add code in two places: right before we resize the
image, and at the end of the script (to return the new image, the layer
and the text).

After we get the text\'s height and width, we need to resize these
values based on the buffer amount specified by the user. We won\'t do
any error checking to make sure it\'s in the range of 0-100% because
it\'s not life-threatening, and because there\'s no reason why the user
can\'t enter a value like "200" as the percent of buffer to add.

            (set! theBuffer (* theImageHeight (/ inBufferAmount 100) ) )

            (set! theImageHeight (+ theImageHeight theBuffer theBuffer) )
            (set! theImageWidth  (+ theImageWidth  theBuffer theBuffer) )
          

All we\'re doing here is setting the buffer based on the height of the
text, and adding it twice to both the height and width of our new image.
(We add it twice to both dimensions because the buffer needs to be added
to both sides of the text.)

Now that we have resized the image to allow for a buffer, we need to
center the text within the image. This is done by moving it to the (x,
y) coordinates of (`theBuffer`, `theBuffer`). I added this line after
resizing the layer and the image:

            (gimp-layer-set-offsets theText theBuffer theBuffer)
          

Go ahead and save your script, and try it out after restarting GIMP.

All that is left to do is return our image, the layer, and the text
layer. After displaying the image, we add this line:

    (list theImage theLayer theText)

This is the last line of the function, making this list available to
other scripts that want to use it.

To use our new text box script in another script, we could write
something like the following:

            (set! theResult (script-fu-text-box
                             "Some text"
                             "Charter" "30"
                             '(0 0 0)
                             "35"
                            )
            )
            (gimp-image-flatten (car theResult))
          

Congratulations, you are on your way to your Black Belt of Script-Fu!

## Your script and its working {#gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial-result}

### What you write

Below the complete script:

      (script-fu-register
                "script-fu-text-box"                        ;function name
                "Text Box"                                  ;menu label
                "Creates a simple text box, sized to fit\
                  around the user's choice of text,\
                  font, font size, and color."              ;description
                "Michael Terry"                             ;author
                "copyright 1997, Michael Terry;\
                  2009, the GIMP Documentation Team"        ;copyright notice
                "October 27, 1997"                          ;date created
                ""                              ;image type that the script works on
                SF-STRING      "Text"          "Text Box"   ;a string variable
                SF-FONT        "Font"          "Charter"    ;a font variable
                SF-ADJUSTMENT  "Font size"     '(50 1 1000 1 10 0 1)
                                                            ;a spin-button
                SF-COLOR       "Color"         '(0 0 0)     ;color variable
                SF-ADJUSTMENT  "Buffer amount" '(35 0 100 1 10 1 0)
                                                            ;a slider
      )
      (script-fu-menu-register "script-fu-text-box" "<Image>/Filters/Tutorial")
      (define (script-fu-text-box inText inFont inFontSize inTextColor inBufferAmount)
        (let*
          (
            ; define our local variables
            ; create a new image:
            (theImageWidth  10)
            (theImageHeight 10)
            (theImage)
            (theImage
                      (car
                          (gimp-image-new
                            theImageWidth
                            theImageHeight
                            RGB
                          )
                      )
            )
            (theText)             ;a declaration for the text
            (theBuffer)           ;create a new layer for the image
            (theLayer
                      (car
                          (gimp-layer-new
                            theImage
                            "layer 1"
                            theImageWidth
                            theImageHeight
                            RGB-IMAGE
                            100
                            LAYER-MODE-NORMAL
                          )
                      )
            )
          ) ;end of our local variables
          (gimp-image-insert-layer theImage theLayer 0 0)
          (gimp-context-set-background '(255 255 255) )
          (gimp-context-set-foreground inTextColor)
          (gimp-drawable-fill theLayer FILL-BACKGROUND)
          (set! theText
                        (car
                              (gimp-text-font
                              theImage theLayer
                              0 0
                              inText
                              0
                              TRUE
                              inFontSize
                              inFont)
                          )
            )
          (set! theImageWidth   (car (gimp-drawable-get-width  theText) ) )
          (set! theImageHeight  (car (gimp-drawable-get-height theText) ) )
          (set! theBuffer (* theImageHeight (/ inBufferAmount 100) ) )
          (set! theImageHeight (+ theImageHeight theBuffer theBuffer) )
          (set! theImageWidth  (+ theImageWidth  theBuffer theBuffer) )
          (gimp-image-resize theImage theImageWidth theImageHeight 0 0)
          (gimp-layer-resize theLayer theImageWidth theImageHeight 0 0)
          (gimp-layer-set-offsets theText theBuffer theBuffer)
          (gimp-floating-sel-to-layer theText)
          (gimp-display-new theImage)
          (list theImage theLayer theText)
        )
      )
          

### What you obtain

![The dialog](images/using/script-fu-example-dialog.png)

![The resulting image](images/using/script-fu-example-result.png)
