# Creating and Using Selections {#gimp-using-selections}

Selections

Using

## Moving or Resizing a Selection {#gimp-using-selections-moving}

Selection

Move selection

Selection

Resize selection

Rectangular and elliptical selections have two modes. The default mode
has handles on the selection. These handles can be used to resize the
selection. Dragging from inside the selection, but not inside the
handles, moves the selection. If you click the selection or press the
Enter key, the handles disappear leaving only the dotted selection
outline ([marching ants](#glossary-marching-ants)). You can return to
the mode with handles by clicking inside the selection again.

If you click-and-drag the selection without handles, you create a new
selection. The other selection tools do not have this division in two
modes.

### Moving selections using the Rectangle and Ellipse Select tools

As mentioned above, the "Rectangle Select" and "Ellipse Select" tools by
default show a selection frame with handles. It is possible to change
the size and location of the selection, but also to move the selection
including the layer contents.

#### Moving and resizing the selection outline

![Moving the selection outline](images/using/select-move-1.png)

Moving or resizing the selection frame, without moving the image
contents, can be done both with the mouse and with the keyboard.

To move the selection with the mouse, click inside the selection in an
area that doesn\'t show one of the handles. Then drag it with the mouse
towards your intended location.

To move the selection with the keyboard, it is currently required that
the mouse pointer is inside the selection frame, or it won\'t work.
Press and hold Alt (or [Ctrl+Alt]{.keycombo}), to move one pixel at a
time. To move 25 pixels at a time add the Shift key to the above
combination.

To resize the selection with the mouse, place the mouse pointer in the
handle area where you want to resize, and then click-drag in the desired
direction. To resize in one direction, use the middle handles; to resize
two neighboring directions, use the handles in one of the corners.

To resize using the keyboard, move the mouse pointer inside the handles
along the edges of the selection frame, and then use the keyboard
shortcuts mentioned above for moving.

#### Moving the selection with the image contents

![Moving a selection and its contents, emptying the original
location](images/using/select-move-2.png)

To move the selection contents (i.e. the part of the layer inside the
selection), you can press [Ctrl+Alt]{.keycombo} and click-and-drag the
selection. The original location of the selected part of the layer will
be emptied (i.e. filled with the current background color).

Note that this action will create a floating layer that needs to be
[anchored](#anchor-floating-selection) to the layer below, or turned
into [a new layer](#gimp-layer-new).

![Moving a selection with a copy of the layer
contents](images/using/select-move-3.png)

To move the selection contents without changing the original, use
[Shift+Alt]{.keycombo} and click-and-drag the selection. The original
location of the selected part of the layer will stay the same while you
move a copy.

Note that this action will create a floating layer that needs to be
[anchored](#anchor-floating-selection) to the layer below, or turned
into [a new layer](#gimp-layer-new).

::: note
On some systems, you must push Alt before Shift or Ctrl. On these
systems, pressing Shift or Ctrl first, causes GIMP to enter a mode that
adds or subtracts from the current selection. After doing that, the Alt
key is ineffective!
:::

### Moving using other Selection Tools

The other selection tools (Free Select, Fuzzy Select, By Color Select,
etc.) have no handles. Using click-and-drag doesn\'t move these
selections. To move their contents, as with rectangular and elliptical
selections, you have to press the [Ctrl+Alt]{.keycombo} or
[Shift+Alt]{.keycombo} keys and then use click-and-drag.

If you use keyboard arrow keys instead of click-and-drag, you move only
the selection outline.

### A different method of moving a selection

You can also use a more roundabout method to move a selection. Make the
[selection floating](#gimp-selection-float). Then you can move its
content using the [Move](#gimp-tool-move) tool, emptying the original
location, by click-and-dragging or keyboard arrow keys.

## Adding or subtracting selections {#gimp-using-selections-add}

Selection

Add / Subtract selections

Tools have options that you can configure. Each selection tool allows
you to set the selection mode. The following selection modes are
supported:

-   Replace is the most used selection mode. In replace mode, a
    selection replaces any existing selection.

-   Add mode, causes new selections to be added to any existing
    selection. Press and hold the Shift key while making a selection to
    temporarily enter add mode.

-   Subtract mode, causes new selections to be removed from any existing
    selection. Press and hold the Ctrl key while making a selection to
    temporarily enter subtract mode.

-   Intersect mode, causes areas in both the new and existing selection
    to become the new selection. Press and hold both the Shift and Ctrl
    key while making a selection to temporarily enter intersect mode.

![Enlarging a rectangular selection with Free
Select](images/using/rectangular+free-select-example.png)

The figure shows an existing rectangular selection. Select [Free
Select](#gimp-tool-free-select). While pressing the Shift key, make a
free hand selection that includes the existing selection. Release the
mouse button and areas are included in the selection.

::: note
To correct selection defects precisely, use the [Quick
Mask](#gimp-using-quickmask).
:::
