# Main Windows {#gimp-concepts-main-windows}

Basic Setup

The GIMP user interface is available in two modes:

-   multi-window mode,

-   single window mode.

When you open GIMP for the first time, it opens in single-window mode by
default. You can enable multi-window mode by unchecking the [Windows \>
Single-Window Mode]{.menuchoice} option in the main menu. After quitting
GIMP, GIMP will start in the mode you have selected next time.

Multi-Window Mode

:   ![A screenshot illustrating the multi-window
    mode.](images/using/multi-window.png)

    1.  *The Toolbox:* Contains a set of icon buttons used to select
        tools. By default, it also contains the foreground and
        background colors. You can add brush, pattern, gradient and
        active image icons. Use [Edit \> Preferences \>
        Toolbox]{.menuchoice} to enable, or disable the extra items.

    2.  *Tool options:* Docked below the Toolbox is a Tool Options
        dialog, showing options for the currently selected tool (in this
        case, the Move tool).

    3.  *Image windows:* Each image open in GIMP is displayed in a
        separate window. Many images can be open at the same time,
        limited by only the system resources. Before you can do anything
        useful in GIMP, you need to have at least one image window open.
        The image window holds the Menu of the main commands of GIMP
        (File, Edit, Select, etc.), which you can also get by
        right-clicking on the window.

        An image can be bigger than the image window. In that case, GIMP
        displays the image in a reduced zoom level which allows to see
        the full image in the image window. If you turn to the 100% zoom
        level, scroll bars appear, allowing you to pan across the image.

    4.  The *Brushes, Patterns, Fonts, Document History* dock --- note
        that the dialogs in the dock are tabs. The Brushes tab is open:
        it shows the type of brush used by paint tools.

    5.  *Layers, Channels, Paths:* The docked dialog below the brushes
        dialog shows the dialogs (tabs) for managing layers, channels
        and paths. The Layers tab is open: it shows the layer structure
        of the currently active image, and allows it to be manipulated
        in a variety of ways. It is possible to do a few very basic
        things without using the Layers dialog, but even moderately
        sophisticated GIMP users find it indispensable to have the
        Layers dialog available at all times.

    Dialog and dock managing is described in
    [???](#gimp-concepts-docks).

Single Window Mode

:   ![A screenshot illustrating the single-window
    mode.](images/using/single-window.png)

    You find the same elements, with differences in their management:

    -   Left and right panels are fixed; you can\'t move them. But you
        can decrease or increase their width by dragging the moving
        pointer that appears when the mouse pointer overflies the right
        border of the left pane. If you want to keep the left pane
        narrow, please use the scroll bar at the bottom of the tool
        options to pan across the options display.

        If you reduce the width of a multi-tab dock, there may be not
        enough room for all tabs; then arrow-heads
        ![](images/stock-icons/pan-start-symbolic.svg) ,
        ![](images/stock-icons/pan-end-symbolic.svg) appear allowing you
        to scroll through tabs.

        ![](images/using/scroll-through-tabs.png)

        As in multi-window mode, you can mask these panels using the Tab
        key.

    -   The image window occupies all space between both panels.

        When several images are open, a new bar appears above the image
        window, with a tab for every image. You can navigate between
        images by clicking on tabs or either using [Ctrl+Page Up or
                        Page Down]{.keycombo} or
        [Alt+Number]{.keycombo}. "Number" is tab number; you must use
        the number keys of the upper line of your keyboard, not that of
        keypad (Alt-shift necessary for some national keyboards).

This is a minimal setup. There are over a dozen other types of dialogs
used by GIMP for various purposes, but users typically open them when
they need them and close them when they are done. Knowledgeable users
generally keep the Toolbox (with Tool Options) and Layers dialog open at
all times. The Toolbox is essential to many GIMP operations. The Tool
Options section is actually a separate dialog, shown docked to the Main
Toolbox in the screenshot. Knowledgeable users almost always have it set
up this way: it is very difficult to use tools effectively without being
able to see how their options are set. The Layers dialog comes into play
when you work with an image with multiple layers: after you advance
beyond the most basic stages of GIMP expertise, this means *almost
always*. And of course it helps to display the images you\'re editing on
the screen; if you close the image window before saving your work, GIMP
will ask you whether you want to close the file.

::: note
If your GIMP layout is lost, your arrangement is easy to recover using
[Windows \> Recently Closed Docks]{.menuchoice}. This menu command is
only available while an image is open. To add, close, or detach a tab
from a dock, click ![](images/stock-icons/gimp-menu-left.svg) in the
upper right corner of a dialog. This opens the Tab menu. Select Add Tab,
Close Tab, or Detach Tab.
:::

The following sections walk you through the components of each of the
windows shown in the screenshot, explaining what they are and how they
work. Once you have read them, plus the section describing the basic
structure of GIMP images, you should have learned enough to use GIMP for
a wide variety of basic image manipulations. You can then look through
the rest of the manual at your leisure (or just experiment) to learn the
almost limitless number of more subtle and specialized things that are
possible. Have fun!
