# Color Management in GIMP {#gimp-concepts-color-management}

Color

ICC profile

Many devices you use in your design or photography workflow, like
digital photo cameras, scanners, displays, printers etc., have their own
color reproduction characteristics. If those are not taken into account
during opening, editing and saving, harmful adjustments can be done to
images. With GIMP you can have reliable output for both Web and print.

<figure>
<p><img src="images/using/colormanagement-workflow1.png"
alt="Workflow without Color management" /></p>
<p><img src="images/using/colormanagement-workflow2.png"
alt="Process with Color management" /></p>
<figcaption>Image Processing Workflow</figcaption>
</figure>

## Problems of a non Color Managed Workflow

The basic problem of image manipulation without color management is that
you do simply not see what you do. This affects two different areas:

1.  There are differences in Colors caused by different color
    characteristics of different devices like cameras, scanners,
    displays or printers

2.  There are differences in Colors caused by the limitations of the
    colorspace a specific device is able to handle

The main purpose of color management is to avoid such problems. The
approach taken to do so involves the addition of a description of the
color characteristic to an image or devices.

These descriptions are called *color profile*. A color profile is
basically a look-up table to translate the specific color characteristic
of a device to a device-independent color space - the so called
working-space. All the image manipulation is then done to images in the
working-space. In addition to that the color profile of a device can be
used to simulate how colors would look on that device.

The creation of color profiles is most often done by the manufacturer of
the devices themselves. To make these profiles usable independent of
platform and operating system, the ICC (International Color Consortium)
created a standard called ICC-profile that describes how color profiles
are stored to files and embedded into images.

## Introduction to a Color Managed Workflow {#plug-in-icc-profile-set}

::: tip
Most of the parameters and profiles described here can be set in the
GIMP preferences. Please see [???](#gimp-prefs-color-management) for
details.
:::

### Input {#plug-in-icc-profile-apply}

Most digital cameras embed a color profile to individual photo files
without user interaction. Digital scanners usually come with a color
profile, which they also attach to the scanned images.

![Applying the ICC-profile](images/using/icc-apply-dialog.png)

When opening an image with an embedded color profile, GIMP offers to
convert the file to the RGB working color space. This is sRGB by default
and it is recommended that all work is done in that color space. Should
you however decide to keep the embedded color profile, the image will
however still be displayed correctly.

In case for some reason a color profile is not embedded in the image and
you know (or have a good guess) which one it should be, you can manually
assign it to that image.

### Display {#gimp-concepts-cm-display}

For the best results, you need a color profile for your monitor. If a
monitor profile is configured, either system-wide or in the Color
Management section of the GIMP Preferences dialog, the image colors will
be displayed most accurately.

One of the most important GIMP commands to work with color management is
described in [???](#gimp-display-filter-dialog).

If you do not have a color profile for your monitor, you can create it
using hardware calibration and measurement tools. On UNIX systems you
will need Argyll Color Management System
[???](#bibliography-online-argyllcms) and/or LProf
[???](#bibliography-online-lprof) to create color profiles.

#### Display Calibration and Profiling {#gimp-concepts-cm-display-profiling}

Color management

Color profile

For displays there are two steps involved. One is called calibration and
the other is called profiling. Also, calibration generally involves two
steps. The first involves adjusting external monitor controls such as
Contrast, Brightness, Color Temperature, etc, and it is highly dependent
on the specific monitor. In addition there are further adjustments that
are loaded into the video card memory to bring the monitor as close to a
standard state as possible. This information is stored in the monitor
profile in the so-called vcgt tag. Probably under Windows XP or Mac OS,
the operating system loads this information (LUT) in the video card in
the process of starting your computer. Under Linux, at present you have
to use an external program such as xcalib or dispwin. (If one just does
a simple visual calibration using a web site such as that of Norman
Koren, one might only use xgamma to load a gamma value.)

The second step, profiling, derives a set of rules which allow GIMP to
translate RGB values in the image file into appropriate colors on the
screen. This is also stored in the monitor profile. It doesn\'t change
the RGB values in the image, but it does change which values are sent to
the video card (which already contains the vcgt LUT).

### Print Simulation

Using GIMP, you can easily get a preview of what your image will look
like on paper. Given a color profile for your printer, the display can
be switched into Soft Proof mode. In such a simulated printout, colors
that cannot be reproduced will optionally be marked with neutral gray
color, allowing you to correct such mistakes before sending your images
to the printer.
