# Gradients {#gimp-concepts-gradients}

Gradient

Overview

<figure>
<img src="images/using/gradient-examples.png"
alt="Gradients from top to bottom: FG to BG (RGB); Full Saturation Spectrum CCW; Nauseating Headache; Browns; Four Bars" />
<figcaption>Some examples of GIMP gradients.</figcaption>
</figure>

A *gradient* is a set of colors arranged in a linear order. The most
basic use of gradients is by the [Gradient tool](#gimp-tool-gradient),
sometimes known as "gradient fill tool": it works by filling the
selection with colors from a gradient. You have many options to choose
from for controlling the way the gradient colors are arranged within the
selection. There are also other important ways to use gradients,
including:

Painting with a gradient

:   Each of GIMP\'s basic painting tools allows you the option of using
    colors from a gradient. This enables you to create brushstrokes that
    change color from one end to the other.

The Gradient Map filter

:   This filter is in the Colors menu, and allows you to "colorize" an
    image, using the color intensity of each point with the
    corresponding color from the active gradient (the intensity 0, very
    dark, is replaced by the color at most left end of the gradient,
    progressively until the intensity is 255, very light, replaced by
    the most right color of the gradient. See [???](#plug-in-gradmap)
    for more information.

GIMP comes presupplied with a large number of gradients. You can also
add new gradients that you create or download from other sources. You
can access the full set of available gradients using the [Gradients
dialog](#gimp-gradient-dialog), a dockable dialog that you can either
activate when you need it, or keep around as a tab in a dock. The
"current gradient", used in most gradient-related operations, is shown
in the Brush/Pattern/Gradient area of the Toolbox. Clicking on the
gradient symbol in the Toolbox is an alternative way of bringing up the
Gradients dialog.

Some quick examples of working with gradients (for more information see
[Gradient Tool](#gimp-tool-gradient)) are:

-   Put a gradient in a selection:

    -   Choose a gradient.

    -   With the Blend Tool click and drag with the mouse between two
        points of a selection.

    -   Colors will distributed perpendicularly to the direction of the
        drag of the mouse and according to the length of it.

    ![How to use rapidly a gradient in a
    selection](images/using/gradient-draw.png)

-   Painting with a gradient:

    You can also use a gradient with one of the drawing tools (e.g.
    Pencil, Paintbrush or Airbrush) if you switch on Enable dynamics and
    set Dynamics to Color From Gradient. In the next step, set the
    gradients length and the Repeat style in the Fade Options section,
    and select a suitable gradient in the Color Options section.
    [???](#gimp-tool-dynamic-options) describes these parameters in more
    detail.

    The following example shows the impact on the Pencil tool.

    <figure>
    <p><img src="images/using/color-gradient-pencil-dialog.png"
    alt="Tool settings" /></p>
    <p><img src="images/using/color-gradient-pencil-example.png"
    alt="Resulting succession of the gradients colors" /></p>
    <figcaption>How to use a gradient with a drawing tool</figcaption>
    </figure>

-   Different productions with the same gradient:

    <figure>
    <img src="images/using/gradient-usage.png"
    alt="Four ways of using the Tropical Colors gradient: a linear gradient fill, a shaped gradient fill, a stroke painted using colors from a gradient, and a stroke painted with a fuzzy brush then colored using the Gradient Map filter." />
    <figcaption>Gradient usage</figcaption>
    </figure>

A few useful things to know about GIMP\'s gradients:

-   The first gradients in the list are special: They use the colors
    from the [Foreground/Background Colors Area in the
    Toolbox](#gimp-toolbox-color-area), instead of being fixed.

    -   FG to BG (HSV Counter-Clockwise) represents the hue succession
        in a color wheel from the selected hue to 360°.

    -   FG to BG (HSV Clockwise) represents the hue succession in a
        color wheel from the selected hue to 0°.

    -   FG to BG (RGB) is the RGB representation of the gradient from
        the Foreground color to the Background color in Toolbox.

    -   TheFG to BG (Hard Edge) gradient generates a gradient from the
        foreground color to the background color, with hard-edged
        transitions in between.

    -   With FG to Transparent, the selected hue becomes more and more
        transparent. You can modify these colors by using the Color
        Selector. Thus, by altering the foreground and background
        colors, you can make these gradients transition smoothly between
        any two colors you want.

    -   The FG to Transparent (Hard Edge) gradient generates a gradient
        from the foreground color to transparency, with hard-edged
        transitions in between.

        Using this gradient, you can generate patterns very quickly with
        the "Repeat" option, alternating repetitive colored shapes with
        full transparency over a given background. Does works best with
        shapes like spiral, radial, square and linear.

-   Gradients can involve not just color changes, but also changes in
    opacity. Some of the gradients are completely opaque; others include
    transparent or translucent parts. When you fill or paint with a
    non-opaque gradient, the existing contents of the layer will show
    through behind it.

-   You can create new *custom* gradients, using the [Gradient
    Editor](#gimp-gradient-editor-dialog). You cannot modify the
    gradients that are supplied with GIMP, but you can duplicate them or
    create new ones, and then edit those.

The gradients that are supplied with GIMP are stored in a system
`gradients` folder.

Gradients that you create are automatically saved in the `gradients`
folder of your personal GIMP directory. Any gradient files (ending with
the extension `.ggr`) found in one of these folders, will automatically
be loaded when you start GIMP. You can add more directories to the
gradient search path, if you want to, in the Gradients tab of the [Data
Folders](#gimp-prefs-folders-data) section of the Preferences dialog.

GIMP can also load gradient files in SVG format, used by many vector
graphics programs. To make GIMP load an SVG gradient file, place it in
the `gradients` folder of your personal GIMP directory, or any other
folder in your gradient search path.

::: tip
You can find a large number of interesting SVG gradients on the web, in
particular at OpenClipArt Gradients
[???](#bibliography-online-openclipart-gradients).
:::
