# Palettes {#gimp-concepts-palettes}

Palette

Introduction

Color

Palettes (color map)

Indexed palette

A *palette* is a set of discrete colors. In GIMP, palettes are used
mainly for two purposes:

-   They allow you to paint with a selected set of colors, in the same
    way an oil painter works with colors from a limited number of tubes.

-   They form the colormaps of indexed images. An indexed image can use
    a maximum of 256 different colors, but these can be any colors. The
    colormap of an indexed image is called an \"indexed palette\" in
    GIMP.

Actually neither of these functions fall very much into the mainstream
of GIMP usage: it is possible to do rather sophisticated things in GIMP
without ever dealing with palettes. Still, they are something that an
advanced user should understand, and even a less advanced user may need
to think about them in some situations, as for example when working with
GIF files.

![The Palettes dialog](images/dialogs/palettes-list-dialog.png)

When you install GIMP, it comes supplied with several dozen predefined
palettes, and you can also create new ones. Some of the predefined
palettes are commonly useful, such as the "Web" palette, which contains
the set of colors considered "web safe"; many of the palettes seem to
have been chosen more or less whimsically. You can access all of the
available palettes using the [Palettes dialog](#gimp-palette-dialog).
This is also the starting point if you want to create a new palette.

![The Palette Editor](images/dialogs/palette-editor-dialog.png)

Double-clicking on a palette in the Palettes dialog brings up the
[Palette Editor](#gimp-palette-editor-dialog), showing the colors from
the palette you clicked on. You can use this to paint with the palette:
clicking on a color sets GIMP\'s foreground to that color, as shown in
the Color Area of the Toolbox. Holding down the Ctrl key while clicking,
on the other hand, sets GIMP\'s background color to the color you click
on.

You can also, as the name implies, use the Palette Editor to change the
colors in a palette, so long as it is a palette that you have created
yourself. You cannot edit the palettes that are supplied with GIMP;
however you can duplicate them and then edit the copies.

When you create palettes using the Palette Editor, they are
automatically saved as soon as you exit GIMP, in the `palettes` folder
of your personal GIMP directory. Any palette files in your directory, or
in the system `palettes` directory created when GIMP is installed, are
automatically loaded and shown in the Palettes dialog the next time you
start GIMP. You can also add other folders to the palette search path
using the [Palette Folders](#gimp-prefs-folders-palettes) page of the
Preferences dialog.

GIMP palettes are stored using a special file format, in files with the
extension `.gpl`. It is a very simple format, and they are ASCII files,
so if you happen to obtain palettes from another source, and would like
to use them in GIMP, it probably won\'t be very hard to convert them:
just take a look at any `.gpl` and you will see what to do.

## Colormap

Confusingly, GIMP makes use of two types of palettes. The more
noticeable are the type shown in the Palettes dialog: palettes that
exist independently of any image. The second type, *indexed palettes*,
form the colormaps of indexed images. Each indexed image has its own
private indexed palette, defining the set of colors available in the
image: the maximum number of colors allowed in an indexed palette is
256. These palettes are called "indexed" because each color is
associated with an index number. (Actually, the colors in ordinary
palettes are numbered as well, but the numbers have no functional
significance.)

![The Colormap dialog](images/dialogs/colormap-dialog.png)

The colormap of an indexed image is shown in the [Indexed Palette
dialog](#gimp-indexed-palette-dialog), which should not be confused with
the Palettes dialog. The Palettes dialog shows a list of all of the
palettes available; the Colormap dialog shows the colormap of the
currently active image, if it is an indexed image -- otherwise it shows
nothing.

You can, however, create an ordinary palette from the colors in an
indexed image---actually from the colors in any image. To do this,
choose Import Palette from the right-click popup menu in the Palettes
dialog: this pops up a dialog that gives you several options, including
the option to import the palette from an image. (You can also import any
of GIMP\'s gradients as a palette.) This possibility becomes important
if you want to create a set of indexed images that all use the same set
of colors.

When you convert an image into indexed mode, a major part of the process
is the creation of an indexed palette for the image. How this happens is
described in detail in [???](#gimp-image-convert-indexed). Briefly, you
have several methods to choose from, one of which is to use a specified
palette from the Palettes dialog.

Thus, to sum up the foregoing, ordinary palettes can be turned into
indexed palettes when you convert an image into indexed mode; indexed
palettes can be turned into ordinary palettes by importing them into the
Palettes dialog.
