# Patterns {#gimp-concepts-patterns}

Patterns

Introduction

A *pattern* is an image, usually small, used for filling regions by
*tiling*, that is, by placing copies of the pattern side by side like
ceramic tiles. A pattern is said to be *tileable* if copies of it can be
adjoined left-edge-to-right-edge and top-edge-to-bottom-edge without
creating obvious seams. Not all useful patterns are tileable, but
tileable patterns are nicest for many purposes. (A *texture*, by the
way, is the same thing as a pattern.)

<figure>
<img src="images/using/patterns-usage.png"
alt="Three ways of using the “Leopard” pattern: bucket-filling a selection, painting with the Clone tool, and stroking an elliptical selection with the pattern." />
<figcaption>Pattern usage</figcaption>
</figure>

In GIMP there are three main uses for patterns:

-   With the [Bucket Fill](#gimp-tool-bucket-fill) tool, you can choose
    to fill a region with a pattern instead of a solid color.

    <figure>
    <img src="images/using/pattern-checked.png"
    alt="The box for pattern fill is checked and a click on the pattern shows you all patterns in grid mode." />
    <figcaption>The checked box for use a pattern</figcaption>
    </figure>

-   With the [Clone](#gimp-tool-clone) tool, you can paint using a
    pattern, with a wide variety of paintbrush shapes.

-   When you *stroke* a path or selection, you can do it with a pattern
    instead of a solid color. You can also use the Clone tool as your
    choice if you stroke the selection using a painting tool.

::: tip
Note: Patterns do not need to be opaque. If you fill or paint using a
pattern with translucent or transparent areas, then the previous
contents of the area will show through from behind it. This is one of
many ways of doing "overlays" in GIMP.
:::

When you install GIMP, it comes presupplied with a few dozen patterns,
which seem to have been chosen more or less randomly. You can also add
new patterns, either ones you create yourself, or ones you download from
the vast number available online.

GIMP\'s *current pattern*, used in most pattern-related operations, is
shown in the Brush/Pattern/Gradient area of the Toolbox. Clicking on the
pattern symbol brings up the [Patterns dialog](#gimp-pattern-dialog),
which allows you to select a different pattern. You can also access the
Patterns dialog by menu, or dock it so that it is present continuously.

To add a new pattern to the collection, so that it shows up in the
Patterns dialog, you need to save it in a format GIMP can use, in a
folder included in GIMP\'s pattern search path. There are several file
formats you can use for patterns:

PAT

:   The `.pat` format is used for patterns which were created
    specifically for GIMP. You can convert any image into a `.pat` file
    by opening it in GIMP and then saving it using a file name ending in
    `.pat`.

    ::: caution
    Do not confuse GIMP-generated `.pat` files with files created by
    other programs (e.g. Photoshop) -- after all, `.pat` is just a part
    of an (arbitrary) file name.

    (However, GIMP *does* support Photoshop `.pat` files until a certain
    version.)
    :::

PNG, JPEG, BMP, GIF, TIFF

:   You can use `.png`, `.jpg`, `.bmp`, `.gif`, or `.tiff` files as
    patterns.

To make a pattern available, you place it in one of the folders in
GIMP\'s pattern search path. By default, the pattern search path
includes two folders, the system `patterns` folder, which you should not
use or alter, and the `patterns` folder inside your personal GIMP
directory. You can add new folders to the pattern search path using the
[Pattern Folders](#gimp-prefs-folders-data) page of the Preferences
dialog. Any PAT file (or any of the other acceptable formats) included
in a folder in the pattern search path will show up in the Patterns
dialog the next time you start GIMP.

::: note
You can add a new pattern quickly as you do for brushes. See
[???](#gimp-creating-brush-quickly).
:::

There are countless ways of creating interesting pattern images in GIMP,
using the wide variety of available tools and filters \-- particularly
the rendering filters. You can find tutorials for this in many
locations, including the GIMP home page
[???](#bibliography-online-gimp). Some of the filters have options that
allows you to make their results tileable. Also, see
[???](#script-fu-tile-blur), this filter allows you to blend the edges
of an image in order to make it more smoothly tileable.
