# Plug-Ins {#gimp-concepts-plugins}

Plug-ins

Introduction

## Introduction

One of the nicest things about GIMP is how easily its functionality can
be extended, by using plug-ins. GIMP plug-ins are external programs that
run under the control of the main GIMP application and interact with it
very closely. Plug-ins can manipulate images in almost any way that
users can. Their advantage is that it is much easier to add a capability
to GIMP by writing a small plug-in than by modifying the huge mass of
complex code that makes up the GIMP core. Many valuable plug-ins have C
source code that only comes to 100-200 lines or so.

Several dozen plug-ins are included in the main GIMP distribution, and
installed automatically along with GIMP. Most of them can be accessed
through the Filters menu (in fact, everything in that menu is a
plug-in), but a number are located in other menus. In many cases you can
use one without ever realizing that it is a plug-in: for example, the
\"Normalize\" function for automatic color correction is actually a
plug-in, although there is nothing about the way it works that would
tell you this. Even importing and exporting of images is done by
plug-ins.

Everyone can write a GIMP plug-in and make it available online. There
are many useful plug-ins that can be obtained this way. Some of them are
described elsewhere in the User\'s Manual.

With this free availability comes a certain degree of risk. The fact
that anyone can release plug-ins means that there is no effective
quality control. The plug-ins distributed with GIMP have all been tested
and tuned by the developers. Additional plug-ins available online, may
have been hacked together in a few hours and then abandoned. Some
plug-in creators don\'t care about robustness, and even for those who
do, their ability to test on a variety of systems in a variety of
situations is often quite limited. Basically, when you download a
plug-in, you are getting something for free, and sometimes you get
exactly what you pay for. This is not to discourage you, just to make
sure you understand that not all plug-ins available online will deliver
what you expect from them.

::: warning
Plug-ins, being full-fledged executable programs, can do all of the
things that any other program can do. This includes installing
back-doors on your system or otherwise compromise its security. Don\'t
install a plug-in unless it comes from a trusted source.
:::

::: note
GIMP 3.0 needed to change its plug-in API in many places. Because of
that, plug-ins written for older versions need to be updated and won\'t
work without changes.
:::

## Using Plug-Ins

For the most part you can use a plug-in like any other GIMP tool,
without needing to be aware that it is a plug-in. But there are a few
things about plug-ins that are useful to understand.

One is that plug-ins are generally not as robust as the GIMP core. When
GIMP crashes, it is considered a very serious thing: it can cost the
user a lot of trouble and headache. When a plug-in crashes, the
consequences are usually not as serious. In most cases you can continue
working without worrying about it too much.

::: note
Because plug-ins are separate programs, they communicate with GIMP in a
special way: The GIMP developers call it "talking over a wire". When a
plug-in crashes, the communication breaks down, and you may see an error
message about a "wire read error".
:::

::: tip
When a plug-in crashes, GIMP gives you a very ominous-looking message
telling you that the plug-in may have left GIMP in a corrupted state,
and you should consider saving your images and exiting. Strictly
speaking, this is quite correct, because plug-ins have the power to
alter almost anything in GIMP, but for practical purposes, experience
has shown that corruption is actually quite rare, and many users just
continue working and don\'t worry about it. Our advice is that you
simply think about how much trouble it would cause you if something went
wrong, and weigh it against the odds.
:::

Because of the way plug-ins communicate with GIMP, they do not have any
mechanism for being informed about changes you make to an image after
the plug-in has been started. If you start a plug-in, and then alter the
image using some other tool, the plug-in may crash. Even if it doesn\'t,
doing this may cause incorrect results. You should avoid running more
than one plug-in at a time on an image, and avoid doing anything to the
image until the plug-in has finished working on it. If you ignore this
advice, not only could you screw up the image, you may also screw up the
undo system, so that you won\'t be able to recover from your mistake.

## Installing New Plug-Ins {#gimp-plugins-install}

Plug-ins

Install

The plug-ins that are distributed with GIMP don\'t require installation.
Plug-ins that you download yourself do. Usually the default location is
in GIMP\'s user directory in a folder under `/plug-ins`, where the
folder name needs to be the same as the plug-in filename. You can find
the default locations where GIMP searches for plug-ins in the [Data
Folders preferences](#gimp-prefs-folders-plug-ins). There you can also
add new locations where GIMP should look for plug-ins. There are several
scenarios, depending on what OS you are using and how the plug-in is
structured.

### Linux / Unix-like systems

Most plug-ins fall into two categories: small ones whose source code is
distributed as a single .c file, and larger ones whose source code is
distributed as a directory containing multiple files including a
`Makefile`.

For a simple one-file plug-in, call it `borker.c`, installing it is just
a matter of running the command `gimptool-3.0.2 --install borker.c`.
This command compiles the plug-in and installs it in your personal
plug-in directory, `~/gimp-3.0.2/plug-ins` unless you have changed it.
This will cause it to be loaded automatically the next time you start
GIMP. You don\'t need to be root to do these things; in fact, you
shouldn\'t be. If the plug-in fails to compile, well, be creative.

### Windows

Most GIMP plug-ins available on Windows supply either an installer, or
can be downloaded in a pre-compiled binary format ready to copy to a
folder of your choice that is recognized by GIMP.

If an installer is available, that should do all the work for you
selecting an appropriate folder and copying all relevant files. If not,
you may have to check in GIMP\'s folder preferences where the plug-ins
should be copied to. Remember, each plug-in needs to be in its own
folder with the same name as the plug-in.

### Apple Mac OS X

How you install plug-ins on OS X mostly depends on how you installed
GIMP itself. If you were one of the brave and installed GIMP through one
of the package managers like fink [???](#bibliography-online-fink) or
darwinports [???](#bibliography-online-darwinports), the plug-in
installation works exactly the way it is described for the Linux
platform already. The only difference is, that a couple of plug-ins
might be even available in the repository of your package manager, so
give it a try.

If, on the other hand, you prefer to grab a prebuilt GIMP package like
GIMP.app, you most likely want to a prebuilt plug-in too. You can try to
get a prebuilt version of the plug-in of your dreams from the author of
the plug-in. Building your own binaries unfortunately involves
installing GIMP.

### Running the installed plug-in

Once you have installed the plug-in, how do you activate it? The menu
path is determined by the plug-in itself, so to answer this you need to
either look at the documentation for the plug-in (if there is any),
explore the menus, or use GIMP\'s command search function by pressing /
and then entering the name of the plug-in. If you know how to read
source code you could also check that to see in what menu it registers
itself.

For more complex plug-ins, organized as a directory with multiple files,
there usually is a file inside called either `INSTALL` or `README`, with
instructions. If not, the best advice is to toss the plug-in in the
trash and spend your time on something else: any code written with so
little concern for the user is likely to be frustrating in myriad ways.

If you install a plug-in in your personal plug-in directory that has the
same name as one in the system plug-in directory, only one can be
loaded, and it will be the one in your home directory. You will receive
messages telling you this each time you start GIMP. This is probably a
situation best avoided.

## Writing Plug-ins {#plugins-write}

Plug-ins

Write

If you want to learn how to write a plug-in, you can find plenty of help
at the GIMP Developers web site
[???](#bibliography-online-gimp-dev-plugin). GIMP is a complex program,
but the development team has made strenuous efforts to flatten the
learning curve for plug-in writing: there are good instructions and
examples, and the main library that plug-ins use to interface with GIMP
(called "libgimp") has a well-documented API. Good programmers, learning
by modifying existing plug-ins, are often able to accomplish interesting
things after just a couple of days of work.
