# The Quick Mask {#gimp-image-window-quick-mask-button}

Quick Mask

![Image with Quick Mask enabled](images/dialogs/channel-quickmask.png)

The usual [selection tools](#gimp-tools-selection) involve tracing an
outline around an area of interest, which does not work well for some
complex selections. The Quick Mask, however, allows you to paint a
selection instead of just tracing its outline.

## Overview {#gimp-image-window-quick-mask-overview}

Normally, a selection in GIMP is represented by ["marching
ants"](#glossary-marching-ants) that trace the selection outline, but
there may be more to a selection than the marching ants show. A GIMP
selection is actually a full-fledged grayscale channel, covering the
image, with pixel values ranging from 0 (unselected) to 255 (fully
selected). The marching ants are drawn along a contour of half-selected
pixels. Thus, what the marching ants show you as either inside or
outside the boundary is really just a slice through a continuum.

The Quick Mask is GIMP\'s way of showing the full structure of the
selection. Quick Mask also provides the ability to interact with the
selection in more powerful ways. Click the bottom-left
![](images/stock-icons/gimp-quick-mask-off-symbolic.svg) button in the
image window to toggle Quick Mask on and off. The button switches
between Quick Mask mode, and marching ants mode. You can also use
[Select \> Toggle Quick Mask]{.menuchoice}, or [Shift+Q]{.keycombo}, to
toggle between Quick Mask and marching ants mode.

In Quick Mask mode, the selection is shown as a translucent screen
overlying the image, whose transparency at each pixel indicates the
degree to which that pixel is selected. By default the mask is shown in
red, but you can change this if another mask color is more convenient.
The less a pixel is selected, the more it is obscured by the mask. Fully
selected pixels are shown completely clear.

In Quick Mask mode, many image manipulations act on the selection
channel rather than the image itself. This includes, in particular,
paint tools. Painting with white selects pixels, and painting with black
unselects pixels. You can use any of the paint tools, as well as the
bucket fill and gradient fill tools, in this way. Advanced users of GIMP
learn that "painting the selection" is the easiest and most effective
way to delicately manipulate the image.

::: tip
To save a Quick Mask selection to a new channel; Make sure that there is
a selection and that Quick Mask mode is not active in the image window.
Use [Select \> Save to Channel]{.menuchoice}. to create a new channel in
the Channels dialog called "SelectionMask copy" (repeating this command
creates "...copy#1", "...copy#2" and so on).
:::

::: tip
In Quick Mask mode, Cut and Paste act on the selection rather than the
image. You can sometimes make use of this as the most convenient way of
transferring a selection from one image to another.
:::

You can learn more on [Selection masks](#gimp-channel-mask) in the
section dedicated to the Channels dialog.

## Properties {#gimp-image-window-quick-mask-properties}

There are two Quick Mask properties you can change by right-clicking on
the Quick Mask button.

-   Normally the Quick Mask shows unselected areas "fogged over" and
    selected areas "in clear", but you can reverse this by choosing
    "Mask Selected Areas" instead of the default "Mask Unselected
    Areas".

-   Use "Configure Color and Opacity..." to open a dialog that allows
    you to set these to values other than the defaults, which are red at
    50% opacity.
