# The Selection {#gimp-concepts-selection}

Selections

Concepts

Often when you operate on an image, you only want part of it to be
affected. In GIMP, you make this happen by *selecting* that part. Each
image has a *selection* associated with it. Most, but not all, GIMP
operations act only on the selected portions of the image.

![How would you isolate the tree?](images/using/fog-tree-example.png)

There are many, many situations where creating just the right selection
is the key to getting the result you want, and often it is not easy to
do. For example, in the above image, suppose I want to cut the tree out
from its background, and paste it into a different image. To do this, I
need to create a selection that contains the tree and nothing but the
tree. It is difficult because the tree has a complex shape, and in
several spots is hard to distinguish from the objects behind it.

![Selection shown as usual with dashed
line.](images/using/select-outline.png)

Now here is a very important point, and it is crucial to understand
this. Ordinarily when you create a selection, you see it as a dashed
line enclosing a portion of the image. The common, not entirely
accurate, idea you could get from this, is that the selection is a sort
of container, with the selected parts of the image inside, and the
unselected parts outside. Although this concept of selection is okay for
many purposes, it is not entirely correct.

Actually the selection is implemented as a *channel*. In terms of its
internal structure, it is identical to the red, green, blue, and alpha
channels of an image. Thus, the selection has a value defined at each
pixel of the image, ranging between 0 (unselected) and 255 (fully
selected). The advantage of this approach is that it allows some pixels
to be *partially selected*, by giving them intermediate values between 0
and 255. As you will see, there are many situations where it is
desirable to have smooth transitions between selected and unselected
regions.

What, then, is the dashed line that appears when you create a selection?

The dashed line is a *contour line*, dividing areas that are more than
half selected from areas that are less than half selected.

![Same selection in Quick Mask
mode.](images/using/select-outline-qmask.png)

While looking at the dashed line that represents the selection, always
remember that the line only tells part of the story. If you want to see
the selection in full detail, the easiest way is to click the [Quick
Mask button](#gimp-image-window-quick-mask-button) in the lower left
corner of the image window. This causes the selection to be shown as a
translucent overlay atop the image. Selected areas are unaffected;
unselected areas are reddened. The more completely selected an area is,
the less red it appears.

Many operations work differently in Quick Mask mode, as mentioned in the
[Quick Mask overview](#gimp-image-window-quick-mask-overview). Use the
Quick Mask button in the lower left corner of the image window to toggle
Quick Mask mode on and off.

![Same selection in Quick Mask mode after
feathering.](images/using/select-outline-qmask-feather.png)

## Feathering {#gimp-concepts-selection-feathering}

With the default settings, the basic selection tools, such as the
Rectangle Select tool, create sharp selections. Pixels inside the dashed
line are fully selected, and pixels outside completely unselected. You
can verify this by toggling Quick Mask: you see a clear rectangle with
sharp edges, surrounded by uniform red. Use the "Feather edges" checkbox
in the Tool Options to toggle between graduated selections and sharp
selections. The feather radius, which you can adjust, determines the
distance over which the transition occurs.

If you are following along, try this with the Rectangle Select tool, and
then toggle Quick Mask. You will see that the clear rectangle has a
fuzzy edge.

Feathering is particularly useful when you are cutting and pasting, so
that the pasted object blends smoothly and unobtrusively with its
surroundings.

It is possible to feather a selection at any time, even if it was
originally created as a sharp selection. Use [Select \>
Feather]{.menuchoice} from the main menu to open the Feather Selection
dialog. Set the feather radius and click OK. Use [Select \>
Sharpen]{.menuchoice} to do the opposite---sharpen a graduated selection
into an all-or-nothing selection.

::: note
For technically oriented readers: feathering works by applying a
Gaussian blur to the selection channel, with the specified blurring
radius.
:::

## Making a Selection Partially Transparent {#gimp-concepts-selection-transparent}

You can set layer opacity, but you cannot do that directly for a
selection. It is quite useful to make the image of a glass transparent.
Use the following methods to set the layer opacity:

-   For simple selections, use the Eraser tool with the desired opacity.

-   For complex selections: use [Select \> Float]{.menuchoice} to create
    a floating selection. This creates a new layer with the selection
    called "Floating Selection" ([???](#gimp-selection-float)). Set the
    opacity slider in the Layers dialog to the desired opacity. Then
    anchor the selection: outside the selection, the mouse pointer
    includes an anchor. When you click while the mouse pointer includes
    the anchor, the floating selection disappears from the Layers dialog
    and the selection is at the right place and partially transparent
    (anchoring works this way only if a selection tool is activated: you
    can also use the Anchor Layer command in the context menu by right
    clicking on the selected layer in the Layers dialog).

    And, if you use this function frequently: [ +Ctrl+ +C+ ]{.keycombo}
    to copy the selection, [ +Ctrl+ +V+ ]{.keycombo} to paste the
    clipboard as a floating selection, and [Layer \> New
    Layer...]{.menuchoice} to turn the selection into a new layer. You
    can adjust the opacity before, or after creating the new layer.

-   Another way: use [Layer \> Mask \> Add Layer Masks...]{.menuchoice}
    to add a layer mask to the layer with the selection, initializing it
    with the selection. Then use a brush with the desired opacity to
    paint the selection with black, i.e. paint it with transparency.
    Then [Layer \> Mask \> Apply Layer Mask]{.menuchoice}. See
    [???](#gimp-layer-mask).

-   To *make the solid background of an image transparent*, add an Alpha
    channel, and use the Magic Wand to select the background. Then, use
    the Color Picker tool to select the background color, which becomes
    the foreground color in Toolbox. Use the Bucket Fill tool with the
    selected color. Set the Bucket Fill mode to "Color Erase", which
    erases pixels with the selected color; other pixels are partially
    erased and their color is changed.

    The simplest method is to use [Edit \> Clear]{.menuchoice}, which
    gives complete transparency to a selection.
