# Undoing {#gimp-concepts-undo}

Undo

Almost anything you do to an image in GIMP can be undone. You can undo
the most recent action by choosing [Edit \> Undo]{.menuchoice} from the
main menu, but this is done so frequently that you really should
memorize the keyboard shortcut, [Ctrl+Z]{.keycombo}.

Undoing can itself be undone. After having undone an action, you can
*redo* it by choosing [Edit \> Redo]{.menuchoice} from the main menu, or
use the keyboard shortcut, [Ctrl+Y]{.keycombo}. It is often helpful to
judge the effect of an action by repeatedly undoing and redoing it. This
is usually very quick, and does not consume any extra resources or alter
the undo history, so there is never any harm in it.

::: caution
If you undo one or more actions and then operate on the image in any way
except by using Undo or Redo, it will no longer be possible to redo
those actions: they are lost forever. The solution to this, if it
creates a problem for you, is to duplicate the image and then test on
the copy. ( Do *Not* test the original, because the undo/redo history is
not copied when you duplicate an image.)
:::

If you often find yourself undoing and redoing many steps at a time, it
may be more convenient to work with the [Undo History
dialog](#gimp-undo-dialog), a dockable dialog that shows you a small
sketch of each point in the Undo History, allowing you to go back or
forward to that point by clicking.

Undo is performed on an image-specific basis: the \"Undo History\" is
one of the components of an image. GIMP allocates a certain amount of
memory to each image for this purpose. You can customize your
Preferences to increase or decrease the amount, using the [System
Resources](#gimp-prefs-system-resources) page of the Preferences dialog.
There are two important variables: the *minimal number of undo levels*,
which GIMP will maintain regardless of how much memory they consume, and
the *maximum undo memory*, beyond which GIMP will begin to delete the
oldest items from the Undo History.

::: note
Even though the Undo History is a component of an image, it is not saved
when you save the image using GIMP\'s native XCF format, which preserves
every other image property. When the image is reopened, it will have an
empty Undo History.
:::

GIMP\'s implementation of Undo is rather sophisticated. Many operations
require very little Undo memory (e.g., changing visibility of a layer),
so you can perform long sequences of them before they drop out of the
Undo History. Some operations, such as changing layer visibility, are
*compressed*, so that doing them several times in a row produces only a
single point in the Undo History. However, there are other operations
that may consume a lot of undo memory. Most filters are implemented by
plug-ins, so the GIMP core has no efficient way of knowing what changed.
As such, there is no way to implement Undo except by memorizing the
entire contents of the affected layer before and after the operation.
You might only be able to perform a few such operations before they drop
out of the Undo History.

## Things That Cannot be Undone

Most actions that alter an image can be undone. Actions that do not
alter the image generally cannot be undone. Examples include saving the
image to a file, duplicating the image, copying part of the image to the
clipboard, etc. It also includes most actions that affect the image
display without altering the underlying image data. The most important
example is zooming. There are, however, exceptions: toggling Quick Mask
on or off can be undone, even though it does not alter the image data.

There are a few important actions that do alter an image but cannot be
undone:

Closing the image

:   The Undo History is a component of the image, so when the image is
    closed and all of its resources are freed, the Undo History is gone.
    Because of this, unless the image has not been modified since the
    last time it was saved, GIMP always asks you to confirm that you
    really want to close the image.

Reverting the image

:   "Reverting" means reloading the image from the file. GIMP actually
    implements this by closing the image and creating a new image, so
    the Undo History is lost as a consequence. Because of this, if the
    image is unclean, GIMP asks you to confirm that you really want to
    revert the image.

"Pieces" of actions

:   Some tools require you to perform a complex series of manipulations
    before they take effect, but only allow you to undo the whole thing
    rather than the individual elements. For example, the Scissors
    Select tool requires you to create a closed path by clicking at
    multiple points in the image, and then clicking inside the path to
    create a selection. You cannot undo the individual clicks: undoing
    after you are finished takes you all the way back to the starting
    point. For another example, when you are working with the Text tool,
    you cannot undo individual letters, font changes, etc.: undoing
    after you are finished removes the newly created text layer.

Filters, and other actions performed by plug-ins or scripts, can be
undone just like actions implemented by the GIMP core, but this requires
them to make correct use of GIMP\'s Undo functions. If the code is not
correct, a plug-in can potentially corrupt the Undo History, so that not
only the plug-in but also previous actions can no longer properly be
undone. The plug-ins and scripts distributed with GIMP are all believed
to be set up correctly, but obviously no guarantees can be given for
plug-ins you obtain from other sources. Also, even if the code is
correct, canceling a plug-in while it is running may corrupt the Undo
History, so it is best to avoid this unless you have accidentally done
something whose consequences are going to be very harmful.
