# Reporting Bugs and Requesting Enhancements {#gimp-introduction-bugs}

GIMP

Bugs

Bugs

Sad to say, no version of GIMP has yet been absolutely perfect. Even
sadder, it is likely that no version ever will be. In spite of all
efforts to make everything work, a program as complicated as GIMP is
bound to screw things up occasionally, or even crash.

But the fact that bugs are unavoidable does not mean that they should be
passively accepted. If you find a bug in GIMP, the developers would like
to know about it so they can at least try to fix it.

Suppose, then, that you have found a bug, or at least think you have:
you try to do something, and the results are not what you expect. What
should you do? How should you report it?

::: tip
The procedure for making an *enhancement request*---that is, for asking
the developers to add a missing feature---is the same as the procedure
for reporting a bug.
:::

In common with many other free software projects, GIMP uses a
bug-reporting mechanism called *GitLab*. This is a very powerful
web-based system, capable of managing thousands of bug reports without
losing track. In fact, GIMP shares its GitLab database with the entire
Gnome project.

# Making sure it\'s a Bug {#gimp-bug-confirm}

The first thing you should do, before reporting a bug, is to make an
effort to verify that what you are seeing really *is* a bug. It is hard
to give a method for doing this that applies to all situations, but
reading the documentation will often be useful, and discussing the
question on IRC or on Discourse may also be quite helpful. If you are
seeing a *crash*, as opposed to mere misbehavior, the odds that it is a
true bug are pretty high: well written software programs are not
designed to crash under *any* circumstances. In any case, if you have
made a conscious effort to decide whether it is really a bug, and at the
end still aren\'t sure, then please go ahead and report it: the worst
that can happen is that you will waste a bit of time for the development
team.

::: note
Actually there are a few things that are known to cause GIMP to crash
but have turned out to be too inconvenient to be worth fixing. One of
them is asking GIMP to do something that requires vast amounts of
memory, such as creating an image one million pixels on a side.
:::

You should also make sure that you are using an up-to-date version of
GIMP: reporting bugs that have already been fixed is just a waste of
everybody\'s time. (GIMP 1 is no longer maintained, so if you use it and
find bugs, either upgrade to GIMP 2 or live with them.) Particularly if
you are using the development version of GIMP, make sure that you can
see the bug in the latest release before filing a report.

If after due consideration you still think you have a legitimate bug
report or enhancement request, the next step is to go to GIMP\'s list of
issues ([](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp/issues/)), and try to see
whether somebody else has already reported the same thing.

## Find a Specific Bug {#bugzilla-find-specific-bug .unnumbered}

Enter some (space separated) search terms, e.g.

> `filter crash`

in the \"Search or filter results\...\" text box and press Enter. By
default you only see open reports; you can change this by clicking
\"All\" above the search field.

The result is either a list of bug reports -- hopefully not too long --
or a message saying "Sorry, your filter produced no results". If you
don\'t find a related bug report by doing this, it may be worth trying
another search with different terms. If in spite of your best efforts,
you file a bug report and it ends up being closed as a duplicate, don\'t
be too upset: it has happened repeatedly to the author of this
documentation.

# Reporting the Bug {#gimp-bug-report}

Okay, so you have done everything you could to make sure, and you still
think it\'s probably a bug. You should then go ahead and file a bug
report on the GitLab page.

::: note
The first time you file a bug report, you will be asked to create a
GitLab account. The process is easy and painless, and you probably
won\'t even get any spam as a result.
:::

-   Go to [](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp/issues), and select New
    issue.

    If you are not logged in, you are automatically redirected to the
    login page. After entering your user name (login) and password, you
    get back to the "New Issue" page.

-   Select Choose a template and choose whether you plan to report a bug
    or to request a feature. Note that most of the information you enter
    can be changed later by the developers if you get it wrong, so try
    to get it right but don\'t be obsessive about it.

    Title

    :   Give a one-sentence summary that is descriptive enough so that
        somebody searching for similar bugs would find your bug report
        on the basis of the words this summary contains.

    Description

    :   Describe the problem. Be as specific as you can, try to provide
        all the information requested from you, and include all
        information that you think might possibly be relevant. The
        classic totally useless bug report is, "GIMP crashes. This
        program sucks". There is no hope that the developers can solve a
        problem if they can\'t tell what it is.

    Sometimes it is very helpful to augment a bug report with a
    screenshot or some other type of data. If you need to do this, click
    on the button Attach a file, and follow the directions. But please
    don\'t do this unless you think the attachment is really going to be
    useful---and if you need to attach a screenshot, don\'t make it any
    larger than necessary. Bug reports are likely to remain on the
    system for years, so there is no sense in wasting memory.

    When you have filled out all of these things, press the Submit issue
    button and your bug report will be submitted. It will be assigned a
    number, which you may want to make note of; you will, however, be
    emailed any time somebody makes a comment on your bug report or
    otherwise alters it, so you will receive reminders in any case. You
    can see the current state of your bug report at any time by going to
    [](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp/issues/).
