# How to Contribute {#gimp-contributing}

GIMP

How to contribute

Welcome to the GIMP-Help team!

This tutorial is intended for writing documentation. If you want to
*translate* the documentation or the user interface, please go to
\"https://l10n.gnome.org/teams/xx\" where \"xx\" is your language code:
ISO 639-1 language codes can be found at
[](https://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/php/code_list.php).

# Prerequisites

## Join Discourse

You can join [Gnome\'s Discourse server](https://discourse.gnome.org/)
and subscribe to the [gimp](https://discourse.gnome.org/tag/gimp) and
[documentation](https://discourse.gnome.org/tag/documentation) tags.
Please, feel free to ask questions. If you do, remember to set the
relevant tags, or we may not see the message.

## Create a Local Working Copy of Code

The GIMP help Manual is lodged in a central repository at
https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp-help. Creating a local copy of this
repository to work on makes sure that everyone can work on his own
without fuzzing around into works of other contributors.

As a newbie, you will access the git repository anonymously (without an
account). Open a terminal and type: *git clone
https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp-help.git* .

If you have a GNOME account, the command is: *git clone
git@gitlab.gnome.org:GNOME/gimp-help.git* .

This will create a "gimp-help" folder in your current directory. Be
patient! That\'s a big download: about 700 MB.

## Installing your sandbox

After downloading your local copy, run: *cd gimp-help* then
*./autogen.sh \--without-gimp ALL_LINGUAS=\"en xx\"*.

When running ./autogen.sh, you can notice some not found packages, for
example "checking for dblatex\... no". Most of them are related to PDF
files and you have to install them before running ./autogen.sh again if
you want to create PDF files.

## The gimp-help folder

The GIMP User Manual is maintained in the xml files of the "src" folder.
You will use these xml files to work on.

# Workflow

## Writing

The language is English (USA).

To edit XML files, use your preferred text editor (this guide\'s author
prefers the free editor Kate). You must set the editor for:

-   English-US language.

-   Indent with 2 spaces (the Tab key must move pointer by two spaces).

-   Replace tabs with spaces (for compatibility with all text editors
    and web browsers).

-   80 characters per line.

-   Automatic spell checking with English (USA) for default language.

Source files are written in the XML language according to the DocBook
DTD. DocBook specifications can be found at
[](https://tdg.docbook.org/tdg/4.5/docbook.html).

Don\'t be afraid. We don\'t use all these items and you will learn XML
progressively reading existing XML files. For new files, please use the
templates you can find in the gimp-help/docs/templates folder.

::: note
If you write a new file, you must add it in the src/gimp.xml file, or in
the XML file that calls it (for example, the src/menus/edit.xml file
calls undo.xml, redo.xml, fade.xml, and so on).
:::

## Validating

When you have finished writing, you should validate your work:

-   For a single file, you can use the following command line:
    `xmllint --noout --nonet --valid your-file.xml`. This command
    displays nothing if your file is OK. When an error is found it will
    show a message indicating the kind of error and where in your file
    it was encountered.

    This command can be used for quickly checking an xml file. It can
    miss or may not find some errors. In case of external references to
    other files it also may show incorrect error messages, because this
    command only checks a single file.

    (The Kate editor has an option (a plug-in) to validate the active
    xml file.)

-   When you want to check multiple files or the whole gimp-help
    repository you should run `make validate-en`. You should get a "No
    error" message.

    If not, a list of validity errors is displayed with line numbers
    referring to the en.xml log file that you can find in the /log
    folder.

    Open this en.xml file in a text editor, use the "jump to line"
    command of your editor (the Kate editor command is
    [Ctrl+G]{.keycombo}), and enter the line number to jump to the
    concerned line in the en.xml file. There, you will find the error.

    If you have worked on several XML files, look above in the en.xml
    file to find (in the "xml:base" field of the "id" tag), in which xml
    file the error is.

    Fix the error. Don\'t forget to save the file and run
    `make validate-en` again.

    ::: note
    A common mistake is editing the en.xml log file instead of the XML
    file.
    :::

## Images

You also have to manage screenshots. Here are some hints for making good
screenshots:

-   reduce screenshot area as much as possible cropping the window
    manager borders and disabling the help button (you can do it in the
    preference dialog),

-   set the image mode to indexed 255 colors [Image \> Mode \>
    Indexed]{.menuchoice}

    This is not necessary for icons and if your image has only few
    colors. In these cases, indexed images are bigger than non-indexed.

-   set print resolution to 144 ppi (not for small images like icons).
    You can do this easily with GIMP from [Image \> Print
    Size...]{.menuchoice}

-   Export images in the PNG format.

Don\'t include English text in images. Translators can\'t translate it
and many users don\'t like that. Use XML captions instead, or provide a
.xcf file in the [Docs \> xcf images]{.menuchoice} folder, indicating it
by a comment in the XML file:
`<!--TO TRANSLATORS: Corresponding .xcf file is in https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp-help/tree/master/docs/xcf%20images -->`

Icons for GIMP are in `/usr/share/gimp/3.0/icons/`. GTK icons are in
`/usr/share/icons/`.

To include an icon in the text:
`<guiicon> <inlinemediaobject> <imageobject> <imagedata fileref="path-to-icon"/> </imageobject> </inlinemediaobject> </guiicon>`

Three commands to manage your images:

-   `make check-image-resolutions-en`: gives the references of images
    whose resolution is not 144 ppi.

-   `make check-images-en`: give references of missing or orphaned
    images.

-   `mogrify units PixelsPerTrack -density 144x144 *.png` to set the
    print resolution of all PNG images.

## Create HTML Files

Once XML files have been validated, run `make html-en`. Creating HTML
files is important to have an idea about what users will see. You will
probably notice some improvements to be made on your XML file.

You can make an HTML draft (when the folder xml/en has been created
during validation) for a single source xml file, by running, for
instance, the command `make preview-xml/en/path-to-file.xml`. This
creates draft.html file in the html folder.

You can also use yelp and run `yelp file:///your-file.xml`.

## Sending your files

When your files are ready:

You don\'t have a GNOME account

:   if you don\'t have a GNOME account, you must find a correspondent
    who accepts to \"push\" files for you; that will not be difficult if
    you send a message to the list. Either you send your xml files and
    the attached images in a compressed file, (in a tree reproducing
    that of the src and images folders if you send several files to make
    your correspondent\'s task easier), or you send a \"patch\" that you
    have to create.

    Before creating a patch, you have to get all your xml files and
    images in the index. Being in the gimp-help folder, do `git status`.
    If you have files in the Untracked files section, run `git add -A`.

    Then run `git diff --full-index --binary origin > name-of-the-patch`
    to create the patch.

You have a GNOME account

:   All being well, you know how to manage Git. There are many tutorials
    for that on the Web.

    A common workflow is:

    \- make validate-en

    \- git status

    \- git stash

    \- git pull

    \- git status

    \- git stash apply

    \- Fix any conflicts

    \- git add -A

    \- git status

    \- git commit -m \"a message\"

    \- git push

# Annexes

XML notes

:   **ID\'s**

    ID\'s, which identify commands and are used when pressing the F1 key
    in the GIMP interface, are in
    https://git.gnome.org/browse/gimp/tree/app/widgets/gimphelp-ids.h

    **XML Tags Examples**

    *procedure*: in using/web.xml.

    *table*: in toolbox/tools-painting.xml.

    *programlisting*: in using/script-fu-tutorial.xml.

    *segmentedlist*: in dialogs/path-dialog.xml for a n columns list.

Parents and Children

:   Here is a diagram I often use.

    ![](images/contribute/xml-tags.png)

# Working under Windows

The documentation here was outdated. For now, please refer to [our
README](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp-help/-/blob/master/README.md#how-to-help-writing-the-manual)
for the gimp-help repository.
