# Tone Mapping and Shadow Recovery Using GIMP's [Colors \> Exposure...]{.menuchoice} {#tone-mapping-tutorial}

This tutorial comes from www.gimp.org/tutorials and was created by Elle
Stone. It is presented here for translations.

A very common editing problem is how to lighten the shadows and midtones
of an image while retaining highlight details, a task sometimes referred
to as "shadow recovery" and more generally speaking as "tone mapping".
This step-by-step tutorial shows you how to use high bit depth GIMP's
floating point Exposure operation to add one or more stops of positive
exposure compensation to an image's shadows and midtones while retaining
highlight details.

# High bit depth GIMP's floating point Exposure operation: much better than Curves for lightening the shadows and midtones of an image without blowing the highlights {#tone-mapping-introduction}

A very common editing problem is how to lighten the shadows and midtones
of an image without blowing out the highlights, which problem is very
often encountered when dealing with photographs of scenes lit by direct
sunlight. Precanned algorithms for accomplishing this task are often
referred to as "shadow recovery" algorithms. But really these algorithms
are special-purpose tone-mapping algorithms, which sometimes work pretty
well, and sometimes not so well, depending on the algorithm, the image,
and your artistic intentions for the image.

This step-by-step tutorial shows you how to use GIMP's unbounded
floating point Exposure operation to recover shadow information---that
is, add one or more stops of positive exposure compensation to an
image's shadows and midtones---without blowing out or unduly compressing
the image highlights. The procedure is completely "hand-tunable" using
masks and layers, and is as close as you can get to non-destructive
image editing using high bit depth GIMP.

**Figure 1:** power lines at noon

Before and after tone mapping (aka "shadow recovery") using high bit
depth GIMP's floating point Exposure operation.

![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/before-auto-stretch-contrast.jpg)

*Scene-referred interpolated raw file.*

![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/power-lines.jpg)

*After tone mapping/shadow recovery using GIMP unbounded Levels.*

High bit depth GIMP is my primary image editor, and I've used the
procedure described below for the last couple of years as my "go to" way
to modify image tonality. The same general procedure can be used to
darken as well as lighten portions of an image, again controlling the
effect using a layer mask. This isn't exactly nondestructive editing
because at some point you need to make a "New from Visible" layer. But
unlike using Curves, using high bit depth GIMP's floating point Exposure
operation doesn't clip RGB channel values and allows you to fine-tune
the results by modifying and re-modifying the layer mask until you are
completely happy with the resulting tonality.

# A step-by-step example showing how to recover shadow information using high bit depth GIMP's floating point [Colors \> Exposure...]{.menuchoice} operation {#tone-mapping-example}

**Figure 2**

![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/tree-exposed-for-sky-ground-is-dark.jpg)

Using high bit depth GIMP's Exposure operation to lighten the ground by
one stop without blowing out portions of the sky.

-   *Left*: The original image, an interpolated camera raw file that was
    deliberately underexposed in camera to avoid blowing out the sky. It
    might not appear to be the case, but this image is already very
    close to having out of gamut RGB channel values in the sky, and a
    simple Auto Stretch Contrast won't lighten the image at all.

-   *Right*: The same image after using high bit depth GIMP's Exposure
    operation at 32-bit floating point linear precision to add one stop
    of positive exposure compensation. An inverse grayscale mask was
    used to keep the highlights from blowing out.

This step-by-step example provides a sample image and is broken down
into five steps, starting with downloading the image. Steps 3, 4, and 5
describe the actual procedure.

-   **Download**
    [tree.png](https://www.gimp.org/tutorials/Tone_Mapping_Using_GIMP_Levels/tree.png),
    which is a 16-bit integer sRGB image. High bit depth GIMP really is
    an "sRGB only" image editor, so it's best if you don't even try to
    edit in other RGB working spaces.

-   **Open tree.png with GIMP and assign the GIMP built-in sRGB profile
    (the image colors won't change a bit). Then convert the image to
    32-bit floating point linear precision**: Select [Image \> Encoding
    \> 32 bit floating point]{.menuchoice}, and in the Encoding
    Conversion dialog, select Linear light (this ensures that the Normal
    blend mode produces radiometrically correct results).

-   Make a copy of the "tree.png" layer via [Layer \> New
    Layer...]{.menuchoice} or [Layer \> New from Visible]{.menuchoice},
    and label it "+1 stop exposure comp". Then use [Colors \>
    Exposure...]{.menuchoice} to add one stop of positive exposure
    compensation. Figure 3 below shows the proper settings for the
    Exposure operation dialog, and Figure 4 shows the result:

    **Figure 3**

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/add-one-stop-positive-exposure-compensation.png)

    *Using the Exposure operation to add one stop of positive exposure
    compensation.*

    When using the Exposure operation to add one stop of positive
    exposure compensation, make sure the image really is at floating
    point precision, because integer precision will clip the highlights.

    **Figure 4**

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/1-stop-positive-exposure-compensation-added.jpg)

    At floating point precision, GIMP's Exposure operation is unbounded.
    This means you can use the Exposure operation to add positive
    exposure compensation without blowing out the highlights.

    Notice the RGB channel values for the four sample points: the
    channel information that would have been clipped using integer
    precision is encoded using channel values that are greater than 1.0
    floating point.

    The image in Figure 4 clearly has "blown" highlights in the sky. But
    the highlights aren't really blown (that is, clipped to 1.0 in one
    or more channels). Instead the highlight information is still there,
    but the RGB channel values fall outside the RGB [display channel
    value](https://ninedegreesbelow.com/photography/display-referred-scene-referred.html)
    range of 0.0f to 1.0f. The sample points dialog in Figure 4 above
    shows four sample points that have RGB channel values that are
    greater than 1.0. As shown in Figure 5 below, adding a mask allows
    you to recover these highlights by bringing them back down into the
    display range.

    If you had used integer precision instead of floating point, the
    highlights really would be blown: The sample points would have a
    maximum channel values of 255, 65535 or 4294967295, depending on the
    bit depth. And masking would only "recover" a solid expanse of gray,
    completely lacking any details (try for yourself and see what
    happens).

-   **Add an inverse grayscale layer mask**: Right-click on the layer
    and select [Layer \> Mask \> Add Layer Masks...]{.menuchoice}, and
    when the Add Layer Mask dialog pops up, choose Grayscale copy of
    layer and check the Invert mask box.

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/add-inverse-grayscale-mask.png)

    As shown in Figure 5 below, at this point the highlights will be
    brought back into the display range, meaning all RGB channel values
    are between 0.0f and 1.0f. But the image will probably look a little
    odd (sort of cloudy and flat), and depending on the image, the
    brightest highlights might actually have dark splotches---don't
    worry! this is temporary.

    **Figure 5**

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/inverse-grayscale-mask-added.jpg)

    Result of adding an inverse grayscale layer mask to bring the
    highlights back into the display range.

    Adding an inverse grayscale layer mask brings the highlights back
    into the display range, but at this point most images will look flat
    and cloudy, and some images will have dark splotches in the
    highlights. The next step---"Auto Stretch Contrast" performed on the
    mask---will take care of this problem.

-   **Click on the layer mask to select it for editing, and then select
    [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice}**:

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/auto-stretch-contrast-mask.png)

    *"Keep Colors" should be checked (though it doesn't really matter on
    grayscale images such as layer masks).*

    **Figure 6** below shows the final result:

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/gegl-exposure-mask-auto-stretched.jpg)

    *Doing [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice} on the
    layer mask removes the "cloudy" appearance, leaving a nicely
    brightened image with intact highlights.*

    [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice} on the mask is
    necessary because just like the image layer has out of gamut RGB
    channel values, the inverted grayscale mask contains out of gamut
    grayscale values. [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
    Contrast...]{.menuchoice} brings all the mask grayscale values back
    into the display range, allowing the mask to proportionately
    compensate for the layer's otherwise out-of-gamut RGB channel
    values, masking more in the layer highlights and less/not at all in
    the image's shadows and midtones.

    *Notice that one of the sample points still has a blue RGB channel
    value that is slightly out of gamut. The easiest way to deal with
    this is to use [Colors \> Levels...]{.menuchoice} and drag the
    [middle slider triangle](#gimp-tool-levels) to make a Gamma
    adjustment of 0.45 on the mask, not on the actual image layer. You
    can make this Gamma adjustment either on the entire mask (works
    well, less effort). Or else you can make the adjustment just on the
    mask shadows (which correspond to the layer highlights), in which
    case you'd load the mask as a selection, invert the selection, and
    make the Gamma adjustment. Or if the remaining out of gamut channel
    values are only very slightly out of gamut, make a "New from
    Visible" layer and then [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
    Contrast...]{.menuchoice} the result to bring the remaining channel
    values back into gamut.*

    That's the whole procedure for using the Exposure operation to add a
    stop of positive exposure compensation to the shadows without
    blowing out the highlights. Now you can either fine-tune the mask,
    or else just make a "New from Visible" layer and continue editing
    your nicely brightened image. Depending on the image and also on
    your artistic intentions for the image, the mask might not need
    fine-tuning. But very often you'll want to modify the resulting
    tonal distribution by doing a gamma correction, or perhaps a Curves
    operation on the mask, or else by painting directly on the mask. And
    sometimes you'll want to blur the mask to [restore micro
    contrast](#restore-micro-contrast).

# Use Notes {#tone-mapping-notes}

1.  Depending on your particular artistic intentions for an image, some
    images are more likely than others to benefit from being tone mapped
    using floating point Exposure operation. Your mileage may vary, but
    typically the procedure described on this page works best for
    photographs of scenes with a pronounced tonal difference between the
    highlights and shadows, as per typical sunny day "sky-ground"
    photographs.

2.  **For adding just one stop of positive exposure compensation, the
    procedure described on this page works really well**. Depending on
    the image you might want to blur the mask using an edge-respecting
    blur algorithm, and/or tweak the mask using the Exposure operation,
    Curves, etc. But only modify the mask after using Auto Stretch
    Contrast on the mask. Otherwise results will be unpredictable:
    [Gamma adjustments produce odd results when operating on out of
    gamut
    values](https://ninedegreesbelow.com/photography/unbounded-srgb-levels-gamma-slider.html),
    and Curves will summarily clip out of gamut values.

3.  **For adding more than one stop of exposure compensation, you can
    use one or more than one positive-exposure-compensation layers**.
    Either way the layer mask(s) will need careful tweaking that's very
    image-specific and also specific to your intended result. Figure 7
    shows an example of using two exposure compensation layers to add
    two and a half stops of exposure compensation to the shadows and
    midtones of an image:

    Using GIMP's floating point unbounded Levels plus layer masks to add
    two stops of positive exposure compensation to the shadows and
    midtones of a photograph of an apple orchard truck that was taken in
    bright sunshine.

    **Figure 7**

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/apple-orchard-truck-from-camera.jpg)

    *Image from the camera, underexposed to avoid blowing out
    highlights.*

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/apple-orchard-truck-tone-mapped-with-Exposur.jpg)

    *After tone mapping/shadow recovery using high bit depth GIMP\'s
    floating point Exposure operation.*

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/truck-tone-mapped-using-gegl-mantuik.jpg)

    *For comparison, Mantuik tone mapping using the GEGL default
    settings.*

    Using GIMP's floating point Exposure operation plus layer masks to
    add two and a half stops of positive exposure compensation to the
    shadows and midtones of a "bright sun" photograph of an apple
    orchard truck.

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/orchard-truck-layer-stack.jpg)

    *A screenshot of the layer stack that I used to tone-map the
    photograph of the apple orchard truck. Tone-mapping by hand gives
    you complete control over the resulting image. Mantuik and other
    "automagic" tone-mapping algorithms are CPU-intensive,
    unpredictable, and often produce unnatural-looking results.*

4.  Before using the Exposure operation to add positive exposure
    compensation, *the base layer should already be stretched to its
    maximum dynamic range*. The easiest way to stretch the base layer to
    its maximum dynamic range is to do [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
    Contrast...]{.menuchoice} and make sure that Keep colors is checked.

    If you've never used an unbounded floating point image editor
    before, [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice} can
    produce an unexpected result: The image might actually end up with a
    severely reduced dynamic range, having either lighter shadows or
    darker highlights or both:

    Before and after doing [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
    Contrast...]{.menuchoice} on the base layer, plus the final image
    after tone mapping using [Colors \> Exposure...]{.menuchoice}:

    **Figure 8**

    1\. Image from the camera

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/before-auto-stretch-contrast.jpg)

    2\. After doing [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
    Contrast...]{.menuchoice}.

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/after-auto-stretch-contrast.jpg)

    3\. Final \"Power lines\" image.

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/power-lines.jpg)

    1.  This scene-referred interpolated raw file from the PhotoFlow raw
        processor (which provides a GIMP plug-in for easy opening of raw
        files) has out-of-display-range RGB channel values that will be
        brought back into the display range by doing [Colors \> Auto \>
        Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice}.

    2.  After doing [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
        Contrast...]{.menuchoice}, shadows are lighter and highlights
        are darker because the dynamic range has been compressed to fit
        within the display range. This looks like an editing step in the
        wrong direction! but actually it's necessary.

    3.  Here's the final "Power lines" image after tone mapping the
        scene-referred interpolated raw file using the procedure
        described in this tutorial.

    As captured by the raw file, this picture of power lines marching
    into the distance is a typical result of taking a photograph at noon
    on a bright sunny day: The sky and clouds looked pretty good right
    out of the camera, but the ground was far too dark. So the image
    could benefit from some tone mapping to raise the shadows and
    midtones. The first step is to select [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch
    Contrast...]{.menuchoice} to bring any channel values that are less
    than 0.0f or greater than 1.0f back within the display range of 0.0
    to 1.0 floating point.

    Performing [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice} to
    bring the channel values back inside the display range doesn't
    exactly look like an editing step in the right direction for
    tone-mapping this particular image! but really it is. Using [Colors
    \> Exposure...]{.menuchoice} to add positive exposure compensation
    to the shadows and midtones won't work if the image has channel
    values that fall outside the display range.

5.  **Dispensing with "useless" shadow and highlight information:**
    Sometimes interpolated raw files of photographs of high dynamic
    range scenes end up with a sprinkling of highlight and shadow pixels
    that contains essentially no useful information. The easiest thing
    to do with such pixels is to use the Exposure operation to set the
    desired black and white points, and then clip the resulting out of
    gamut channel information.

    -   **Useless highlight information:** For the "Power lines" picture
        shown in Figure 8 above, after applying [Colors \> Auto \>
        Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice}, a measly 48 pixels occupied
        nearly half the tonal range (see the histogram to the right). A
        little investigation with GIMP's Threshold tool revealed that
        all 48 pixels are the peak values of specular highlights on the
        ceramic insulators on the power line pole in the foreground.

        ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/histogram-specular-highlights.png)

        In cases where nearly half the histogram is occupied by a
        sprinkling of specular highlights, clipping the pixels is often
        the best and easiest solution. For the "Power lines" image, the
        48 pixels in question carried essentially zero information. Use
        [Colors \> Exposure...]{.menuchoice} to raise the white point,
        and then [Colors \> RGB Clip...]{.menuchoice} to actually clip
        the channel information in the highlights (this time making sure
        the Clip high pixel values box was checked).

    -   **Useless shadow information:** Some raw processors can output
        images with negative channel values. And previous edits using
        high bit depth GIMP might have produced negative channel values.
        If doing [Colors \> Auto \> Stretch Contrast...]{.menuchoice} on
        your base image layer makes the image a whole lot lighter in the
        shadows, the problem is negative RGB channel values. One
        solution is to use [Colors \> Exposure...]{.menuchoice} to move
        the black point to where you want it to be, and then clip the
        negative channel values. Here are two ways to clip negative
        channel values:

        -   Use [Colors \> RGB Clip...]{.menuchoice}, making sure to
            uncheck the Clip high pixel values box.

        -   Or else create a solid black layer above your base image
            layer, set the blend mode to "Lighten only", and make a "New
            from Visible" layer.

6.  **Blurring the mask to restore micro contrast:** Putting an inverse
    mask on a layer that's used to add positive exposure compensation
    necessarily slightly flattens micro contrast. Depending on your
    artistic intentions for the image, you might want to blur the mask
    to restore micro contrast. The trick is how to blur the mask without
    introducing "halos" around the edges of objects in the image. Small
    radius Gaussian blurs produce small but distressingly obvious halos
    around dark edges. A large radius gaussian blur sometimes works but
    just as often produces a large obvious halo separating the brighter
    and darker portions of the image. For many images a better solution
    is to blur the mask use an edge-respecting filter such as the GIMP
    G'MIC bilateral smooth filter:

    Adding exposure compensation with and without bilateral smoothing of
    the mask.

    **Figure 9**

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/without-bilateral-smoothing-of-mask.jpg)

    *Without applying bilateral smoothing to the mask, micro contrast is
    flattened.*

    ![](images/tutorials/tone-mapping/with-bilateral-smoothing-of-mask.jpg)

    *After applying bilateral smoothing to the mask, micro contrast is
    restored.*

    Adding exposure compensation combined with an inverse grayscale mask
    does flatten micro contrast, which might or might not be desirable
    depending on your artistic intentions for the image. To restore
    micro contrast, try using an edge-respecting blur such as G'MIC's
    bilateral smoothing filter. GIMP G'MIC doesn't work on layer masks.
    A workaround is to turn the unblurred mask into a selection, save
    the selection as a channel, and then drag the channel to the layer
    stack for blurring.

7.  An essential component of the procedure for using the Exposure
    operation to add positive exposure compensation to images with dark
    shadows and midtones needs to be explicitly mentioned: Not only is
    the high bit depth GIMP's Exposure operation unbounded at floating
    point precision --- [layer masks are also
    unbounded](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/gimp/-/issues/595).

    If the inverted grayscale masks were summarily clipped (as is the
    case when editing at integer precision), then the procedure
    described in this tutorial wouldn't work.

# Conclusion {#tone-mapping-conclusion}

Photographs taken in bright direct sunlight typically are of high
dynamic range scenes, and the resulting camera file usually requires
careful tone mapping to produce a satisfactory final image. High bit
depth GIMP's floating point Exposure operation provides a very useful
tool for dealing with this type of image, and of course is equally
useful for any image where the goal is to raise the shadows and midtones
without blowing out the highlights.

High bit depth GIMP's floating point Exposure operation combined with a
suitable layer mask can also be used to darken portions of the image,
either by moving the upper left Value slider to the right (darkens the
image by increasing contrast and also increases saturation; requires
careful masking to avoid producing regions of solid black), or moving
the lower right Value slider to the left (darkens the image by
decreasing contrast, useful for de-emphasizing portions of the image).

This is a GIMP-specific tutorial. However, the same technique can be
employed using the PhotoFlow raw processor and possibly other image
editors that allow for 32-bit floating point processing using unbounded
RGB channel values. The neat thing about using this technique in
PhotoFlow is that PhotoFlow uses nodes, which allows for completely
non-destructive editing of the inverted grayscale mask that's used to
recover the highlight detail after applying positive exposure
compensation to raise the tonality of the shadows and midtones (even if
you close and reopen the image, if you save the image's PFI file).

~The\ original\ tutorial\ this\ was\ adapted\ from\ can\ be\ and\ is\ reproduced\ courtesy\ of\ Elle\ Stone~

~GIMP\ Tutorial\ -\ Tone\ Mapping\ Using\ GIMP\ Levels\ (text\ and\ images)\ by\ Elle\ Stone\ is\ licensed\ under\ a\ Creative\ Commons\ Attribution-ShareAlike\ 3.0\ Unported\ License.~
